         Title     Molecular Dynamics Simulation of SiO2 and SiN
                   Etching for 3D NAND Memory Device Applications

       Author(s)   Cagomoc, Donato Charisse Marie


        Citation   大阪大学, 2023, 博士論文


      Version Type VoR


          URL      https://doi.org/10.18910/91922


         rights


          Note




The University of Osaka Institutional Knowledge Archive : OUKA
                    https://ir.library.osaka-u.ac.jp/

                           The University of Osaka
                 Doctoral Dissertation




   Molecular Dynamics Simulation of
 SiO2 and SiN Etching for 3D NAND
       Memory Device Applications



          Charisse Marie Donato Cagomoc



                   December 2022



          Applied and Engineering Physics
Division of Precision Engineering and Applied Physics
          Graduate School of Engineering
              OSAKA UNIVERSITY
                        Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge all of the people who had been instrumental in my journey
to obtain my Ph.D. degree.

   I give my sincere gratitude to Professor Satoshi Hamaguchi for accepting me in his
laboratory as a Master student. I was able to obtain my Master’s degree in engineering
through his guidance. I thank Professor Hamaguchi for allowing me to continue my
graduate studies as a Ph.D student under his tutelage. I truly appreciate all the help and
guidance he had given me, as well as, the opportunities to present my research in various
international and local conferences. Professor Hamaguchi has truly been a great sensei
to me, and has been instrumental in my efforts to obtain a Ph.D. degree.

   I would like to acknowledge our collaborators, Drs. Eric Hudson and Leonid Belau
of Lam Research Corporation, for the fruitful discussion that help in the progress of
this research. I am also thankful for the support provided by the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) Research Fellowship for Young Scientists.

   Moreover, I would like to thank Prof. Kazuhiro Karahashi, Dr. Tomoko Ito, and
Shouichi Taira for the support with the experiments. I would also like to thank my
colleagues in Hamaguchi Laboratory especially Erin, Anjar, Nina, Sarah, Umemura-san,
Nagao-san, Nicolas, Enggar, Jomar, Pierre, Abdul, Ikuse-san, Isobe-san, Hojun, Jaber,
Ichi-kun, Kita-kun, Kotani-kun, Kawabata-kun and Fujita-kun. You all have made my
stay in Hamaguchi Laboratory fun and exciting. I hope that our connections would not
be lost after we go our separate ways.

   I also thank my family in the Philippines for their unending support in my endeavours
to further my education. Even though we are miles apart, your love and support has been
a source of strength for me.

   Lastly, I thank God for all the blessings and protection He had bestowed upon me as
I pursued my Ph.D. degree at Osaka University.
                                   Abstract
As the sizes of semiconductor devices continue to shrink, fabrication of device structures
on material surfaces with high accuracy poses unprecedented challenges to process tech-
nologies employed in the manufacturing of semiconductor devices such as NAND flash
memory devices. NAND flash started as planar or 2D NAND. However, the scaling of
2D NAND was not able to keep up to the demand for higher memory capacity. As such,
2D NAND transitioned to 3D NAND. In 3D NAND, alternating films are deposited and
stacked to form the basis of the memory cell. The number of stacked layers dictates the
memory capacity. In the fabrication of such devices, hole channels with a high-aspect
ratio (HAR) are etched through these layers. The higher the aspect ratio becomes, the
more difficulties HAR etching faces. Therefore, the primary goal of this study is to under-
stand the HAR etching process through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations supported
by ion beam experiments.

   To understand how energetic ions interact with the sidewalls of HAR channels during
reactive ion etching (RIE), MD simulations for the scattering of neon, argon, and xenon
ions on silicon (Si) and silicon dioxide (SiO2 ) surfaces were performed. The simulations
were performed at grazing-angle ion incidence to examine how the angular distribution
of reflected ions deviates from that of the ideal specular reflection, depending on the ion
mass, incident angle, and surface material and its roughness. It is found that, the higher
the ion mass is, the less grazing the ion incident angle is, or the rougher the surface is,
the larger the angular distribution of reflected ions becomes around the corresponding
specular reflection angles. Quantitative information on such reflected ions can be used to
predict the profile evolution of HAR channels in RIE processes.

   Alternating films of SiO2 and silicon nitride (SiN) are commonly used in 3D NAND
devices. As such, MD simulations were performed to examine the etching of SiO2 , SiN,
and oxide-nitride (ON) stacked layers by energetic fluorocarbon ions. Good agreement of
etching yields obtained from the simulations and ion beam experiments was observed for
                                                                                          vi

the etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions for the incident ion energy ranging from 200eV
to 2,000eV. As to the etching of the ON bilayer, the SiO2 and SiN layers were observed
to be etched with their own etch rates at low ion incident energy. However, at sufficiently
high incident ion energy, the oxide and nitride layers were mixed by energetic ion impact
and the depth of the mixing layer exceeded the thickness of the top SiO2 layer thickness,
resulting in a single etch rate limited by the etch rate of the much deeper underlying
SiN material. This suggests that, if the incident ion energy is high enough such that the
thicknesses of the multilayers are lower than the ion penetration depth, the ON stacked
layer exhibits a single etch rate determined by the mixed material of the oxide and nitride.
As such, the etch rates in ONON multilayer etching would be dependent on the thickness
of the films and the ion energy used.

   Additionally, MD simulations of SiO2 and SiN etched by CF3 + ions and Cl+ ions were
performed to provide insights on the etching with Cl-containing fluorocarbon plasmas.
To do this, interatomic potentials for the interaction of chlorine with carbon and fluorine
was first developed. Afterwards, the etching yields obtained from MD simulations were
compared with ion beam experimental etching yield. Relatively good agreement between
the simulation and experimental etching yields were obtained for the etching of Si, SiO2
and SiN by Cl+ ions with incident ion energy ranging from 50eV to 3,000eV. To understand
the etching with Cl-containing fluorocarbon plasmas, the simulations of the etching of
SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with and without Cl+ injected with incident ion energy
ranging from 500eV to 2,000eV at 0° and 60° were compared. It was shown that at 0°,
addition of Cl+ ions has minimal and even negative effect on the etch rate of SiO2 and
SiN. Only when the ions were injected at 60° did an increase in etch rate was observed.

   This study also aims to understand the mechanisms of reactive ion etching processes
to form nanometer-scale holes (nanoholes) into a SiO2 surface region with a carbon mask
by fluorocarbon plasmas, using MD simulation. The results showed that, in the case of
ion beam etching by CF3 + ions, the etching yield generally increased with increasing ion
energy, and etching at high ion incident energies was dominated by physical sputtering.
Table of Contents                                                                     vii

Preferential removal of oxygen was also observed, which resulted in Si-rich etched hole
channel inner walls. Tapered etched hole channels were formed due to the re-deposition of
sputtered atoms. The effects of the simultaneous irradiation of CF3 radicals with CF3 + )
ion injection on the etching process were also investigated. It was shown that there was
an optimum ratio of the radical to ion fluxes to maximize the etching yields.
Contents

Acknowledgments                                                                             iii

Abstract                                                                                     v

Contents                                                                                   vii

Abbreviations                                                                              xiii

1 Introduction                                                                               1
  1.1 Flash Memory Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          1
       1.1.1 3D NAND Flash Memory Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               2
  1.2 Etching Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4
       1.2.1 Reactive Ion Etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
       1.2.2 High Aspect Ratio Etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7
       1.2.3 Mass-Selected Ion Beam System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           8
  1.3 Classical Molecular Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        10
       1.3.1 Interatomic Potential Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         11
       1.3.2 Integration Algorithm of Newton’s Equations of Motion . . . . . . .            14
       1.3.3 Statistical Mechanical Ensembles and Thermostat Algorithms . . .               16
       1.3.4 MD Simulation Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         17
  1.4 Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20

2 Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2
  Surfaces                                                                               21
  2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
  2.2 MD Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  2.3 Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
       2.3.1 Angular distributions of reflected ions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
       2.3.2 Reflection probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
  2.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Oxide-Nitride Bilayer Etching with
  Energetic Fluorocarbon Ions                                                            39
  3.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  3.2 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
  3.3 Results and Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

                                             ix
Table of Contents                                                                              x

         3.3.1 Etching of SiO2 and SiN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        45
         3.3.2 Etching of an Oxide-Nitride Bilayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        56
               3.3.2.1 Etching Yields and Etch Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            56
               3.3.2.2 Desorbed Species from the ON bilayer Etching . . . . . .               60
   3.4   Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    62

4 Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Oxide and Nitride Etching by CF3 +
  and Cl+                                                                                65
  4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
  4.2 MD Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
  4.3 Interatomic Potential Model for Fluorocarbon and Chlorine Interaction . . 69
  4.4 Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
      4.4.1 Simulation and Experimental Etch Yield Comparison . . . . . . . . 75
      4.4.2 Etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions . . . . . . . . 76
      4.4.3 Desorbed Species from the Etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + and
             Cl+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
  4.5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

5 Molecular Dynamics Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon
  Plasmas                                                                                87
  5.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
  5.2 MD Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
  5.3 Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
      5.3.1 Etched Hole Profiles of SiO2 with Carbon Masks by CF3 + Ion beams 95
      5.3.2 SiO2 Nanohole Etching with an Ideal Mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
      5.3.3 SiO2 Etching by Simultaneous FC Radical and Ion Irradiation . . . 105
  5.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107

6 General Conclusion                                                                         109


A Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2
  Surfaces – Supporting Results                                     113

B Etching of ONON Multilayer by CF3 + Ions                                                   117

C MD Simulation of Oxide and Nitride Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ –
  Supporting Results                                                            119
  C.1 Fluorocarbon and Chlorine Interatomic Potential Model . . . . . . . . . . 119
  C.2 Depth Profiles of SiO2 and SiN Etched by CF3 + and Cl+ . . . . . . . . . . 125
  C.3 Etch Rate of SiO2 and SiN Etched by CF3 + and Ar+ . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
  C.4 Desorbed Species from the Etching of SiN by CF3 + and Cl+ . . . . . . . . 129

D MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by FC Plasmas – Supplementary
  Material                                                                           131
  D.1 Interatomic Potential Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Table of Contents                                                                        xi

   D.2 Deposition of CF3 Radicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135


Bibliography                                                                          137

Research Achievements                                                                 155
Abbreviations

   Ar       Argon
   AR       Aspect Ratio
   ARDE     Aspect-Ratio Dependent Etching
   BiCS     Bit-Cost Scalable
   C        Carbon
   CF3      Trifluorocarbon
   Cl       Chlorine
   CTF      Charge-Trap Flash
   DFT      Density Functional Theory
   EEPROM   Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-only Memory
   F        Fluorine
   FC       Fluorocarbon
   FG       Floating-Gate
   HAR      High Aspect Ratio
   LJ       Lennard-Jones
   MD       Molecular Dynamics
   NAND     Not And
   Ne       Neon
   ONO      Oxide-Nitride-Oxide
   ONON     Oxide-Nitride-Oxide-Nitride
   RIE      Reactive Ion Etching
   RF       Radio Frequency
   Si       Silicon


                                xiii
List of Abbreviations                                          xiv


        SiO2            Silicon Dioxide
        SiN             Silicon Nitride
        SRIM            Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter
        SW              Stillinger-Weber
        TCAT            Terabit Cell Array Transistor
        vdW             Van der Waals
        WL              World Lines
        Xe              Xenon
        2D NAND Two-dimensional NAND
        3D NAND Three-dimensional NAND
Chapter 1


Introduction


1.1     Flash Memory Technology

Flash memory is a non-volatile memory technology commonly used in electronic devices,
and was first introduced by Toshiba in 1980’s. The name came from the fact that the
contents of the memory cells can be erased in a flash. During this time, memory devices
were based on two different logic gates: NOR and NAND. NOR flash is generally used
for low-density, high-speed read applications. On the other hand, NAND flash is for
low-cost, high-density, data storage applications [1–3]. NAND flash memory technology
was also first developed by Toshiba to address the memory density limitation of their
Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-only Memory (EEPROM) technology [4]. Due
to its cost effectiveness, NAND flash has become the primary solution to any platforms
(e.g. smartphones, laptops, digital cameras, etc.) that requires data storage [3, 5, 6].

   The structure of NAND flash was initially made by connecting floating-gate (FG)
transistors to form planar array of memory-cells (2D NAND). In such design, the memory
capacity would be limited by the number of transistors that can be integrated planarly in a
single-chip. To increase the memory capacity, the node size of transistors was continuously
miniaturized [5, 6]. Both Micron [7] and SK Hynix [8] has shown the feasibility of a

                                             1
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                               2

NAND flash with 16nm node, while Samsung Electronics [9] was able to push to 14nm
node. Though major manufacturers of NAND flash has shown the feasibility of reaching
≤ 16nm planar node, it was no longer economically viable. The fundamental limitation
in integration of transistors to increase the memory capacity of 2D NAND has already
been reached. This led to the scaling of NAND flash memory technology to transition
from 2D to 3D [5, 6, 10].




              Figure 1.1: Design rule trend: 2D NAND vs 3D NAND [10].




1.1.1    3D NAND Flash Memory Technology

When the scaling of 2D NAND was no longer economically viable, the research and
development on 3D NAND emerged to address the demand for higher memory capacity.
The thought behind 3D NAND is similar to the thought behind the construction of high-
rise apartments and condominiums, i.e. increase capacity vertically. By stacking memory
cells vertically, the memory density per area would increase in proportion to the number
of stacked cells [5, 6, 11]. The pioneering work on 3D NAND started with a 2 stacked
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                 3

memory cells [12] which culminated to the first cost-effective 3D NAND proposed by
Toshiba called the Bit-Cost Scalable (BiCS) shown in Fig. 1.2 [6, 13].




    Figure 1.2: (a) Bird’s-eye view of BiCS Flash memory; (b) Top-down view of BiCS
         Flash memory array; (c) Cross section of BiCS flash memory string [13].



   There are two different mainstream memory cell technology in 3D NAND: the con-
ventional FG cell and the charge-trap flash (CTF) cell shown in Fig. 1.3. In general, a
memory cell is comprised of a control gate, blocking layer, storage layer, tunneling layer
on the substrate. In conventional FG cell, the storage layer is called the floating-gate
made up of a conducting material. In contrast, the storage layer in CTF cell is a dielec-
tric. The control gates in these memory cells are connected by the world lines (WL). 3D
NAND with FG cells typically use polysilicon WL, while 3D NAND with CTF cells uses
tungsten WL. The drain of the memory cells are connected by the bit lines. Currently,
most 3D NAND structures uses CTF cells due to a thinner storage layer, and simpler
fabrication processes in contrast to conventional FG cells [2, 6, 11, 14, 15].

   The fabrication process of 3D NAND is dependent on its structure which varies de-
pending on the manufacturer. However, key steps in the fabrication process remains the
same. The fabrication process starts with film stack deposition step wherein alternating
films (e.g. SiO2 and SiN) are deposited on the the substrate. This step can be referred to
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                  4




           Figure 1.3: FG Flash 3D NAND (left); CTF 3D NAND (right) [14].


as WL stacking and has been the primary scaling path of 3D NAND since the memory
capacity can be increased by increasing the number of stacked layers. The film stack
deposition is followed by the formation of the vertical channels. This is done by first de-
positing a mask and creating hole openings to proceed with the high-aspect ratio (HAR)
channel etch step. In HAR etching, the hole channels are etched through all layers of
deposited films. The next key step is the stair etch wherein the staircase shape structure
of 3D NAND is formed to create the contact pads for the WL’s. This is then followed by
the slit etch step. In this step, a hardmask is first deposited and patterned with open-
ings. The memory cell arrays are then formed by separating the hole channels with the
slit etch step. The last key step would be the formation of the bit lines that are usually
perpendicular to the WL’s [14, 16–19]. The focus in this study is the HAR etching step
in the fabrication of 3D NAND flash memory devices.




1.2     Etching Process

The fabrication process of 3D NAND discussed in the previous section showed how crucial
the etching process is in the semiconductor industry. The etching process is usually
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                  5

preceded by the lithography process. In lithography, resist or mask are deposited on top
of the films on the wafers. The desired patterns are then made on the mask. Etching
would then transfer these patterns on films by selectively removing parts of the deposited
films to create the desired circuit design. Etching is categorized as wet etching and dry
etching. In wet etching, the films or material to be etched are removed isotropically by
chemical solutions. On the other hand, dry etching removes the films anisotropically using
reactive ions or vapor phase etchant. Dry etching can generally be categorized into three
types: (1) reactive ion etching (RIE); (2) sputter etching; and (3) vapor phase etching.
This study would only focus on RIE as it is the process involve in 3D NAND fabrication
[20–22].



1.2.1      Reactive Ion Etching

RIE is a type of dry etching process that uses plasma to generate reactive ions that
would etch the material. Chen defines plasma as "a quasineutral gas of charged and
neutral particles which exhibits collective behavior" [23]. In RIE, a parallel-plate system
is generally used as shown in Fig. 1.4. In such system, the wafer is placed on the bottom
electrode, after which the entire chamber is pumped down to high vacuum conditions.
The gas with the desired chemistry would be introduced. In general, plasma is generated
by applying 13.56MHz RF power to the electrodes in the chamber containing process
gas. The gas would be ionized, and the plasma comprising of a quasineutral mixture of
ions, electrons, photons, neutrals, molecules, and atoms would be generated. Reactive
species such as radicals could react with the surface atoms on the wafer to form volatile
byproducts that would then be removed via the exhaust. This process could be referred
to as "chemical sputtering" since the reactive species induces chemical reactions that
would lead to desorption of volatile byproducts. In RIE, surface atoms could also be
etched if the generated ions have a high kinetic energy that can sputter the surface atoms
without reacting. This process could be referred to as "physical sputtering". In RIE,
chemical sputtering is isotropic while physical sputtering is highly anisotropic. As such,
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                  6

etch channels could have a non-uniform profile. It is therefore necessary to balance the
chemical and the physical aspect of RIE to have a uniform etch. In some cases, a bias
voltage is applied to the bottom electrode that hold the wafer. By applying a bias voltage,
the ions from the plasma could be directed towards the wafer which would make the RIE
highly directional and anisotropic. As such, RIE is the widely used etching process in
semiconductor industries [20–26].




                       Figure 1.4: Schematic Diagram of RIE [20].


   Fluorocarbon (FC) plasma is one of the most commonly used plasma in RIE of Si-
based materials in semiconductor industries. The basis in using FC plasma in the etching
of Si-based materials is the reaction of silicon with fluorine to form volatile by products
such as SiF4 . Examples of etching gases for FC plasma are CF4 , C2 F4 , and C2 F6 . In
CF4 plasma, the dissociation of the gas would primarily produce CF3 + , CF3 , F, CF3 - ,
and F- [27–29]. As such, the main species of interest in this research is CF3 . Due to
the negative bias applied to the bottom electrode that holds the wafer, negative ions
do not contribute to the etching. On the other hand, studies have shown that the ions
and radicals are the primary contributors to the etching. However, carbon deposition
on the wafer and RIE chamber has been observed for FC plasma etching. This led to
the fluorine to carbon (F/C) ratio concept in FC plasma etching. The F/C ratio has
become an important process parameter in determining whether etching or deposition
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                      7

of a CF film would dominate the process. In general, at high F/C ratio, etching would
proceed due to the high flux of fluorine that would react with Si-based material. At low
F/C, the plasma would become fluorine-deficient and carbon would deposit. At a certain
point, the deposition of carbon would dominate over etching and lead to polymerization.
In the etching of SiO2 by CF4 plasma, Si atoms could be etched by F atoms as SiFx
species, while O atoms could be etched as COx or COF2 species. As such, in the presence
of oxygen, the carbon deposition could be decreased. The role of the F/C ratio in FC
plasma etching has been qualitatively illustrated by Coburn and Winters as shown in
Fig. 1.5 [27, 29–34].




    Figure 1.5:    The qualitative effect of the fluorine to carbon (F/C) ratio on etching
                     and polymerization processes in a FC plasma [32].




1.2.2     High Aspect Ratio Etching

As discussed previously, HAR etching is one of the key processes in the fabrication of
3D NAND. In this step, hole channels are etched through all the deposited films. This
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                   8

step is the focus in this study as it is the main roadblock in further scaling of 3D NAND
devices to increase its memory capacity. When the number of layers is increased, etching
a hole channel with a straight and smooth profile becomes more difficult [14, 16]. Ideally,
a straight and smooth channel is needed to have a well fabricated 3D NAND device.
However, deviations from the ideal profile could occur and these deviations fall under
the umbrella term aspect-ratio dependent etching (ARDE) phenomena. ARDE happens
in all etching process but is much more of a concern in HAR etching. In ARDE, the
etch rate decreases as the aspect-ratio increases. As the aspect-ratio increases, the flux
of reactive species reaching the bottom of the etched channel decreases, and it becomes
more difficult for the byproducts to escape. This is also referred to as RIE lag. In some
cases, etch stop could occur wherein the etched channel does not reach the substrate
[24, 25]. Incoming ions could be deflected by the mask, the sidewalls, and/or by other
species in the plasma. The deflected ions could change the direction of the etch front, thus
causing the etch channels to have non-ideal profiles such as tapered, twisted or bowed. In
a channel with HAR, the sputtered or etched atoms could have difficulty in escaping the
channel. In such cases, re-deposition of the etched or sputtered atoms onto the channel
sidewalls could occur which contributes to formation of non-ideal profiles as shown in
Fig. 1.6 [24, 25, 35–37].



1.2.3     Mass-Selected Ion Beam System

As discussed previously, parallel-plate system containing several different gas admixtures
is generally used to ignite the plasma in RIE. In such a process, the plasma would contain
various ions that would participate in etching. However, understanding the interactions
of all the ions in such a system is extremely difficult. As such, a mass-selected ion
beam system wherein the etching of a material with one type of ion has been developed
(Fig. 1.7). The details of the beam system were discussed in Ref. 38 and would not be
discussed here.
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                              9




                          Figure 1.6: HAR Etching Profiles
                                           .




          Figure 1.7: Schematic diagram of the mass-selected ion beam system.


   Etching is done by directing the mass-selected ion beam towards the sample with a
metal stencil mask. After ion bombardment, the difference in the height of the unetched
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                10

(i.e. covered by the mask) and etched part of the material would be measured ex-situ
by either a contact profilometer or an inference film thickness gauge. The ion beam
experimental yield Y could then be calculated with



                                               dn
                                        Y =                                          (1.1)
                                               D


where d is the etched depth in cm, n is the density of the etched material in atom/cm3 ,
and D is the dose in ion/cm2 . The dose D is given by



                                               It
                                        D=                                           (1.2)
                                               eS


where I is the ion current in ampere, t is the beam irradiation time in seconds, e is the
elementary charge, and S is the beam irradiation surface area in cm2 .




1.3     Classical Molecular Dynamics

The properties and behaviour of a real physical system, and reaction dynamics of various
process can be studied by molecular dynamics (MD) [39, 40]. In MD, the nucleus and
the electron of an atom can be treated as one particle due to the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation. The Born-Oppenheimer approximation approximates the motion of the
atom as the motion of the nucleus since neutrons move significantly slower than the
electrons due to the large difference in their masses [41, 42]. As such, MD is a numerical
simulation method that treats the system to be simulated as a combination of mass-point
particles interacting with each other through a defined interatomic potential function.
The interatomic potential function would define the forces that acts on any given atom
given the position of other atoms. By numerically solving Newton’s equations of motion,
how the forces calculated from the interatomic potential function affects the motion of
the atoms can be determined [39, 40, 42–44].
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                     11

   The accuracy of the MD simulation is highly dependent on the interatomic potential
functions as these functions describes the atomic interactions. Atomic interactions could
be short-range, bonded interaction such a bond stretching, or long-range, non-bonded
interaction such as Van der Waals [45]. Interatomic potential functions provides only a
good approximation of true atomic interactions since atomic interactions are governed by
quantum mechanics [39, 43, 46]. Short-range interaction between two atoms is shown in
Fig. 1.8 wherein the interactions between two atoms switches from repulsive to attractive
at an equilibrium distance r0 . There are many interatomic potential functions that have
been developed as the use of simulations in research has expanded. However, we would
only discuss the Stillinger-Weber potential, Molière repulsive pair potential, and the Van
der Waals (VdW) potential as they are the basis of the potential functions used in this
study.




                 Figure 1.8: Short-range Atomic Interaction Diagram [47]
                                               .



1.3.1     Interatomic Potential Function

The Stillinger-Weber (SW) potential is a many-body potential energy function developed
by Stillinger and Weber [48] to describe the interactions in solid and liquid forms of Si. In a
system containing N particles, the potential-energy function Φ describing the interactions
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                                             12

among the particles can be separated into one-body V1 , two-body V2 , three-body V3 , until
N -body VN contributions as shown in Eq. 1.3.

                        X                X                       X
      Φ(1, ..., N ) =         V1 (i) +          V2 (i, j) +              V3 (i, j, k) + ... + VN (1, ..., N)      (1.3)
                         i                i,j                    i,j,k
                                         i<j                    i<j<k


Eq. 1.3 is simplified by assuming that the one-body V1 contribution that describes the
external forces acting on the system is zero. Additionally, the VN contribution is also
assumed to converge to zero with increasing number of N for Eq. 1.3 to be useful in
computational simulation. The total potential Φ can therefore be assumed as a linear
combination of the two-body V2 and three-body V3 interactions as shown in Eq. 1.4
[48, 49].
                              Φ(r1 , · · · rN ) ∼
                                                    X                       X
                                                =          V2 (i, j) +             V3 (i, j, k)                   (1.4)
                                                    i<j                    i<j<k

SW-type potential functions for Si-O-Cl and Si-O-F systems were derived by Ohta and
Hamaguchi [45, 50]. In this SW-type potential, all atoms are considered charge-neutral.
Eq. 1.4 was parameterized by first defining the two-body V2 contribution into the repulsive
VR and attractive or bonding VB interaction between two atoms.
                                                                
                                                      −p c
                                         VR = ar exp
                                                      r − rc
                                                                                                                (1.5)
                                                 −q        d
                                         VB = −br exp
                                                        r − rc

If we assume that VR is linearly dependent on the square of VB (p = 2q and c = 2d), the
two-body V2 interaction for the i th and j th atoms would be
                              
                                                                                         
                              ar−2q exp            2d
                                                               − br−q exp             d
                                                                                                    if rij < rc
                              
                              
                                                 rij −rc                          rij −rc
                                                                                                ,
                V2 (i, j) =                                                                                       (1.6)
                                                                                                    if rij ≥ rc
                              
                              0,
                              


where a, b, d, q, and rc are parameters with rc being the interatomic cutoff distance
[45, 50, 51].
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                                       13

    The three-body V3 interaction describes the angular dependencies of the i th , j th , and
k th atoms given by


           V3 (i, j, k) = hjik (rij , rik , θjik ) + hijk (rji , rjk , θijk ) + hikj (rki , rkj , θikj ).   (1.7)


The h function in Eq. 1.7 is dependent on the angle between three atoms θ (the vertex
atom is denoted by the center subscript), and the distances r of the two atoms from the
vertex atom given by


                  hijk (rji , rjk , θijk ) = kijk |cos θijk − Θijk |γijk fij (rij )fjk (rjk ).              (1.8)


where k, Θ, and γ are parameters. The f function in Eq. 1.8 prevents the overestimation
of the angular dependency, and is dependent on V2 given by
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                                1,          r ≤ rmin ,
                                               
                                               
                                   fij (r) =     V2 (r)
                                                        , rmin < r < rc ,                                   (1.9)
                                                V2min
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               0,
                                                         r > rc ,


where rmin is the distance between the i th and j th at the minimum two-body interaction
energy V2min [45, 50, 51].

    The parameters for two-body V2 and three-body V3 potential functions are determined
by Levenberg-Marquardt nonlinear fitting of the potential energy curve of various atomic
configurations. The potential energy curves are obtained from ab initio quantum mechan-
ical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) using the software Gaussian
[52].

    The interatomic potential function used in this study to describe the short-range
interactions of the system of interest excluding interactions with noble gases is based on
this parameterized SW potential function. The short-range interactions with noble gases
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                                                 14

are described by the Molière [42] repulsive pair potential given by

             Zi Zj e2
                                                                                                               
                                           −0.3rij                          −1.2rij                        −6.0rij
  V (rij ) =                0.35 exp                     + 0.55 exp                       + 0.10 exp
             4πϵ0 rij                        a                                a                              a
                                                                                                                     (1.10)
with
                                                               1/2      1/2
                                       a = 0.885a0 (Zi               + Zj )−2/3

where Zi and Zj are the atomic numbers, and a0 = 5.29177249 x 10−11 is the Forsov
screening length and Bohr radius [42, 50].

   Long-range interactions among the atoms are also considered in the simulation, and
are described by Van der Waals potential given by
                        
                           n                         o                           
                                  σ 12         σ 6                  d1     d2
                                                                                      if c2 < r < c1 ,
                                               
                        4ϵ
                        
                                  r
                                       −       r
                                                         exp       r−c1
                                                                        − r−c
                                                                                                                     (1.11)
                                                                              2
         VV dW (r) =
                                                                                      otherwise
                        
                        0,
                        


where ϵ = 0.0108 eV, σ = 3.5 Å, d1 = d2 = 0.1 Å, c1 = 8.0 Åand c2 = 3.5 Å. The
repulsive interaction of the Van der Waals is not included since the repulsive interaction
of the atoms is already accounted by the two-body V2 potential that describes covalent
bonding. Also, the minimum bond energy in Van der Waals interactions is extremely
small (⋍ 10-2 eV) in comparison to typical covalent bonds (several eV) [50, 53].



1.3.2     Integration Algorithm of Newton’s Equations of Motion

With a relatively accurate interatomic potential, the motion of the atoms that are treated
as classical particles can be determined by numerically solving Newton’s equations of
motion. For a system containing N particles interacting by a potential Φ(⃗ri ), Newton’s
equation of motion is given by

                                                              ∂Φ(⃗ri )
                                             F⃗i = mi⃗¨ri = −                                                        (1.12)
                                                               ∂⃗ri
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                15

with
                                              p⃗i = mi⃗r˙i

where i = 1, 2 ... N, mi is the mass of particle i, and ⃗˙ri and ⃗¨ri are the first and
second derivative respectively at position ⃗ri with respect to time t. To have an accurate
representation of the interactions of the atoms in the system, ⃗ri should be evaluated at
small time steps ∆t [44]. The differential equations to be solved would increases as the
system to be simulated gets larger. As such, various integration algorithms has been
developed to integrate Newton’s equations of motion. One of the common integration
algorithm is the Verlet algorithm [44, 54] given by

                                                                 1 ⃗
                      ⃗ri (t + ∆t) = 2⃗ri (t) − ⃗ri (t − ∆t) +      Fi (t)(∆t)2     (1.13)
                                                                 mi

where the new position at time (t + ∆t) is calculated from the position and force at time
t, and the position at time (t − ∆t). The velocity can be derived from Eq. 1.13 and is
given by
                                         ⃗ri (t + ∆t) − ⃗ri (t − ∆t)
                                 ⃗vi =                                              (1.14)
                                                    2∆t


   Another integration algorithm is the Leapfrog algorithm. This algorithm is a modi-
fication of the Verlet algorithm wherein the new particle position is calculated from the
next half-step ∆t/2 velocity given by the velocity the leaps over the coordinate, thus the
name leapfrog [44].

                                                      
                                   ∆t                 ∆t      1 ⃗
                        ⃗vi t +         = ⃗vi t −          +    Fi (t)(∆t)
                                   2                   2     mi
                                                                                  (1.15)
                                                             ∆t
                           ⃗ri (t + ∆t) = ⃗ri (t) + ⃗ri t +       ∆t
                                                             2

The velocity can be derived from Eq. 1.15 and is given by

                                      vi t + ∆t   + vi t − ∆t
                                                             
                                ⃗vi =        2             2
                                                                .                   (1.16)
                                                  2
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                  16

1.3.3     Statistical Mechanical Ensembles and Thermostat Algo-

          rithms

The instantaneous positions and velocities of all particles in the system can be obtained
by integrating Newton’s equations of motions. However, properties of the system cannot
be determined with just the positions and velocities of the particles. Statistical mechanics
must be used to obtain relevant macroscopic properties from MD simulation [39].

   In this study, the microcanonical N V E ensemble is used. An N V E ensemble describes
an adiabatic process wherein the total energy of the system ET otal = EP otential + EKinetic
is conserved in which the number of the atoms / particles N and the volume of the
system V are constant. With an N V E ensemble, the system is allowed to evolve under
microcanonical conditions. Other statistical ensemble are N P T and N V T . An N P T
ensemble describes an isothermal-isobaric system wherein the number of particles N , the
pressure P and temperature T are kept constant. On the other hand, N V T is an ensemble
with the number of particles N , the volume of the system V , and the temperature T are
kept constant [39, 44, 45].

   In MD simulations, the system is first allowed to evolve under microcanonical N V E
ensemble. After which, the system would be cooled down to room temperature (300 K)
through thermostat algorithms. One of the most common thermostat algorithms is the
Nose-Hoover thermostat algorithm. The Nose-Hoover thermostat was proposed by Nose
and extended by Hoover wherein the temperature of the system is controlled by coupling
it to a heat bath [55, 56].

   For the simulations done in this study, the temperature of the system is cooled down by
decreasing the velocities of all atoms through Langevin thermostat [44, 57]. In Langevin
dynamics, the Newton’s equation of motion is modified to describe the movement of a
particle in a viscous system. This is done by adding the noise term ξ⃗i that describes
Brownian motion, and a friction constant Γi that determines the rate of temperature
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                   17

relaxation given by
                                mi⃗¨ri = F⃗i − mi Γi⃗r˙i + ξ⃗i (t).                   (1.17)


   Aside from Langevin thermostat, another thermostat algorithm called Berendsen
Weak-Coupling algorithm was employed in the MD simulations. In the Berendsen ther-
mostat [58], a heat bath with a predefined temperature Td is weakly coupled to the system.
When the temperature of the system T fluctuates from Td , T is corrected by re-scaling
the velocities of all particles at the rate of the time constant τT by the scaling factor χ
where ∆t is the defined time step. Continuous velocity scaling causes the kinetic energy
from high-frequency motion (i.e. bond stretching, angle bending) to be repressed, while
kinetic energy from low-frequency motion (i.e. global translation, global rotation) are
increased. This causes the system to exhibit an unphysical phenomenon called the ‘flying
ice cube’ wherein the system is frozen in a single conformation that translates or rotates
in space [44, 58, 59]. As such, Berendsen thermostat is only employed for the last 100fs
in all simulations.
                                    dT    Td − T
                                        =                                             (1.18)
                                    dt      τT
                                               1/2
                                       ∆t Td
                                χ= 1+          −1
                                       τT T



1.3.4     MD Simulation Conditions

The etching process is simulated in MD by injecting a predefined impact particle referred
to as ’ion’ on the material to be etched referred to as substrate. All simulations in this
study was done with MDsurf simulation code developed in the Hamaguchi Laboratory
that has been used in several studies [45, 53, 60–72].

   In the beginning of the MD simulation, the substrate is first created by replicating
its defined unit cell in all directions until the desired initial dimensions of the substrate
is attained. The initial velocities of the particles were randomly assigned based on the
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                    18

relation
                                               kb Ti
                                          v=                                           (1.19)
                                                m

where Ti is the initial temperature at 300 K, kb is the Boltzmann constant, and m is
the particle mass [39, 45]. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in the horizontal
directions. As such, an actual surface can be simulated. A 0.5 nm layer of atoms at the
bottom of the substrate are fixed (v = 0) to prevent lateral displacement of the simula-
tion box. This layer is referred to as ’anchor’. The anchor is continuously added under
two conditions: (1) atoms reached passed the bottom; and (2) the volume-averaged tem-
perature Ttotal of the substrate exceeds the defined maximum temperature Tmax (usually
1,700 K). With such conditions, the height of the substrate is theoretically infinite, and
would only be defined once the simulation has been stopped. Before injecting the ions,
the substrate is relaxed at 300K for 10,000fs to relieve substrate stress. The substrate is
also relaxed whenever an anchor is added.

   Once the substrate is created, the injection cycle is started by placing the ion at
random x and y directions. The ion is then injected towards the substrate at the defined
incident angle and ion energy. In all MD simulations, the electrical charges of the ions are
not considered as part of the interatomic forces. As such, though the impact particles are
referred to as ions, the ions are treated as neutral species having the same kinetic energies.
This approximation is based on the assumption that charged species in the plasma are
neutralized at the moment of impact on the surface by the Auger effect [73, 74]. Upon
ion injection, the kinetic energy of the ion is transferred to the substrate, then collision
cascade occurs. This step is referred to as the energy preservation step since the system
is allowed to evolve under constant total-energy conditions (N V E ensemble). The energy
preservation step generally lasts for 300fs. Due to the kinetic energy transfer from the ion,
the temperature of the system increases. As such, the system is artificially cooled down to
prevent unrealistic heating. This is done by decreasing the velocities of all atoms with a
Langevin thermostat for about 1600fs. Berendsen thermostat was then employed for the
last 100fs of the injection cycle. Berendsen thermostat is only applied for 100fs to suppress
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                 19

the ‘flying ice cube’ effect. A variable time step from 0.2fs to 0.5fs was used which would
be adjusted depending on the fastest calculated velocities of the particles. The time step
is small enough for good conservation of total energies of isolated systems. Except for
the duration of the Berendsen cooling, the duration of the steps in the injection cycle can
be varied as necessitated. In general, one injection cycle lasts for 2,000fs. The injection
cycle is repeated for more than 1,000 times to have statistical accuracy in calculating
macroscopic properties of the etching process such as etch yield and etch rate.




                      Figure 1.9: Flow chart of the MD simulation
                                             .
Chapter 1. Introduction                                                                  20

1.4     Objectives

The primary objective of this research is to provide insight in the mechanism of the high
aspect ratio etching step in the fabrication of 3D NAND devices through MD simulations
supported by beam experiments. As HAR etching is a complex problem, the research has
been divided into four main sections.

   In Chapter 2, ion scattering simulations on smooth and rough surfaces of Si and SiO2
by Ne+ , Ar+ , and Xe+ ions were performed. The ions were injected at glancing angle
to represent how ions interacts with the sidewalls of HAR channels. By doing this, the
effects of atomic scale roughness on ion scattering could be inferred. In Chapter 3, etching
simulations of SiO2 , SiN, and oxide-nitride multilayer by CF3 + ions were performed. This
was done to understand how the etching mechanism changes when etching through differ-
ent materials. In Chapter 4, etching simulations of SiO2 , and SiN by CF3 + ions and Cl+
ions were performed to provide insights on the etching with Cl-containing fluorocarbon
plasmas. To do this, interatomic potentials for the interaction of Cl with fluorocarbon
were first developed. Simulation etch yields were compared with ion beam experiments
to validate the MD simulation. In Chapter 5, etching simulations of SiO2 with carbon
masks by CF3 + ions were performed. This was done to understand the mechanisms of
reactive ion etching processes to form nanometer-scale holes (nano-holes) into a SiO2
surface region with a carbon mask by fluorocarbon plasmas.
Chapter 2


Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing
Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2
Surfaces


2.1     Introduction

Semiconductor devices with higher integration have been continuously developed to ad-
dress the demand for high-speed information processing and communication. NAND
flash memory technology [6, 16, 17, 75] has been the leading solution to any platform
that requires data storage. Manufacturing of 3D NAND devices requires the formation
of extremely deep holes with relatively small cross-section diameters. Their aspect ratio
(i.e., the ratio of the depth to the diameter) has continued to increase to accommodate
more memory cells along the sidewalls of deep high-aspect-ratio (HAR) holes or chan-
nels. Plasmas are widely used to etch material surfaces in semiconductor manufacturing
processes [27, 28, 76–79]. Simultaneous irradiation of energetic ions and chemically reac-
tive species generated in a plasma can efficiently etch a material surface, which is called



                                            21
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                          22

reactive ion etching (RIE) [20, 80]. RIE to form HAR channels is considered to be one
of the most challenging processes in 3D NAND manufacturing [81–84].

   In RIE processes to form HAR channels (i.e., HAR etching), some energetic ions hit
the sidewalls at grazing incidence and get reflected [61, 85, 86]. Most of such ions are
considered to be reflected specularly on the sidewalls. However, depending on the side-
wall materials (i.e., chemical compositions) and surface roughness, they may be reflected
differently. Due to the difficulty of ion scattering experiments at grazing incidence, most
studies on ion scattering on trench or hole sidewalls have been performed with numerical
simulation. For examples, Van Nguyen et al. [87] and Dalton et al. [88] showed that ion
scattering from the sidewalls greatly affected the mechanisms of trench etching. Abrams
and Graves [89] modeled the scattering of low energy argon (Ar) ions (≤ 200 eV) on sili-
con dioxide (SiO2 ) surfaces and showed that incident angle less than 85° from the surface
normal roughened the surface, which consequently affected the reflection characteristics
of the ions incoming at glancing angles. Cagomoc et al. [90] showed incident fluorocar-
bon ions colliding with the SiO2 sidewalls at glancing angles during hole channel etching
preferentially sputtered off oxygen (O) atoms.

   While few experimental studies seem to have been published so far of grazing angle
scattering on silicon (Si)-based material surfaces, some studies examined ion scattering on
carefully prepared smooth and pristine metal surfaces. Romney and Anderson performed
molecular beam experiments to study the scattering of 0.05 eV–5 eV Ar from silver (Ag)
(111) surfaces [91]. They reported that the scattering distributions of Ar at all energies
peaked at/near specular angles. Hays et al. extended the energy range to 20 eV, wherein
they also observed specular reflection [92]. Scattering experiments of 3 keV noble gas
atoms and ions from a copper (Cu) (111) surface under grazing incidence by Pfandzelter
et al. showed polar-angle distributions that peaked at the specular reflection [93].

   The goal of this study is to understand the effect of atomic-scale roughness of HAR
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                           23

channel sidewalls on the ion scattering. For this purpose, we performed molecular dy-
namics (MD) simulations [43, 94, 95] to obtain angular distributions of ions scattered on
smooth and rough Si and SiO2 surfaces at grazing incidence. Quantitative information
on such scattered or reflected ions can be used to predict the profile evolution of HAR
channels in RIE processes [96–106].




2.2     MD Simulation

MD simulation was used to simulate the scattering of Ar+ , neon (Ne+ ), and xenon (Xe+ )
ions on a 4.3 nm x 4.3 nm Si surface or 4.2 nm x 4.2 nm SiO2 surface. Two types of
surface morphology were defined for each material: (1) pristine or smooth surface; and (2)
rough surface wherein the roughness was artificially created by placing around 1 nm-high
protrusions on the surface, as shown in Fig. 2.1. The horizontal size of each protrusion is
also about 1 nm x 1 nm.

   The modeled roughness was selected to be sufficiently smaller than the typical rough-
ness of etched structures but slightly larger than atomic scales. For example, figures of
the sidewall striations in HAR etching of hole channels with a diameter of 100 nm re-
ported by Omura et al. [83] indicate that such roughness is over 10 nm in height. The
line edge roughness (LER) of Si fin structures reported by Dixit et al. [107] is around 4
nm. The goal of this study is to clarify the effects of roughness smaller than "observable"
roughness (e.g., about 10 % of the minimum dimension of the structure to be etched)
on ion scattering. This is because, in typical profile simulation models, such observable
roughness can be directly modeled as part of the surface structures that reflect incident
ions in certain directions. Effects of surface roughness smaller than the size of such an
observable surface structure may appear as distributed angles of scattered ions around
the specular angle. In this study, we attempt to understand such angular distributions of
scattered ions on seemingly flat Si or SiO2 surfaces as functions of the small-scale surface
roughness and incident ion species.
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                                      24




    Figure 2.1: Atomic-scale surface models used in the MD simulations of this study.
    Here (a) and (b) represent smooth and rough crystalline Si surfaces and (c) and (d)
    represent smooth and rough SiO2 surfaces. To model the scattering phenomena of
    incident ions on the sidewall of a HAR channel (as schematically depicted on the left),
    the top surfaces of (a)-(d) represent small areas of the nearly vertical sidewall surfaces of
    the HAR channel, into which energetic ions are at grazing incidence. The depth of each
    surface model here is depicted as relatively thin but, in MD simulations of high-energy
    ion impact, sufficiently thick surface models were employed, as discussed in the main
                   text. The orientation of the top Si surface of (a) is (100).


   The atomic interactions among Si and O atoms used in this study given by Stillinger-
Weber potential functions [48, 49, 108], as discussed in Refs. 45, 109, 110. All interactions
with nobles gases (Ar, Ne, and Xe) were described by the Moliére repulsive pair potential
[42, 45]. Though the injected particles were referred to as ions, the MD code treated
the injected ions as fast neutrals based on the assumption that incident ions would be
neutralized near the surface [73, 74]. The scattering simulation code used in this study had
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                              25

been extensively used in previous studies of plasma etching and deposition simulations
[53, 60, 63, 74, 111–117].

   The model surface represents a part of the sidewall of a Si or SiO2 channel. Although
the area that the model represents may be small compared with the deep trench or
hole scale, it is assumed to be large enough on the atomic scale. Therefore, periodic
boundary conditions were imposed in the horizontal directions of the model surface (i.e.,
the directions of the sidewall surface). The depth of the model surface is taken to be
sufficiently deep and the positions of the atoms in the bottom layer were fixed to prevent
the downward drift of the surface model during the simulation. If the incident ion or
a recoiled atom of the material reaches the bottom layer of the surface model during
the simulation, additional layers of the same material were added to the surface model
from the bottom, making the depth of the surface model theoretically infinite. In our
simulation, the initial surface model was in thermal equilibrium at 300 K.

   In actual etching processes to form HAR 3D NAND channels through a stacked
film of dozens – or even over a hundred – of pairs of thin SiO2 /silicon nitride (SiN)
or SiO2 /polycrystalline Si layers, [81, 84, 117] reactive ions and charge-neutral radicals
generated in fluorocarbon or hydrofluorocarbon plasmas are used with masks made of
carbon-based materials [38, 118–122]. However, this study used noble-gas species instead
as injected ions to focus on simple physical scattering phenomena and removed possible
effects of chemical reactions. It should be noted that Ne has an atomic mass close to
those of C and F and Ar has a mass close to that of Cl, i.e., reactive species widely used
in plasma processing.

   The scattering phenomenon was simulated by injecting ions with an incident angle
θi and following the ion trajectories as the ions were scattered by the surface [86]. The
reflection angle (θr ) and azimuthal angle (ϕa ), as defined in Fig. 2.2, of each reflected ion
were recorded for analysis. The incident angle and the reflection angle are measured from
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                                          26




    Figure 2.2: Definitions of the angles of incident and scattered ions relative to the
    surface normal and the direction of ion incidence. The side and top views of the surface
    model are given on the left and right. The blue sphere represents the incident ion and the
    broken lines and arrows represent the ion paths and their directions. The incident angle
    is θi , the reflection angle, i.e., angle of the reflected or scattered ion (or the corresponding
    charge-neutral atom after charge exchange on the surface) measured from the surface
    tangent is denoted as θr , and the azimuthal angle of the reflected ion is denoted as ϕa .
                      Note that, for specular reflection, θr = 90◦ − θi and ϕa = 0.


the surface. The azimuthal angle of the reflected ion path is defined as the azimuthal
angle around the axis normal to the surface at the location of impact.

   As the simulation was performed to study the scattering on the sidewalls of HAR
structures, the ions were initially injected at oblique angles from 5°– 20° with an ion
energy (Ei ) of 1,000 eV. Additional scattering simulations for Ar+ with incident angles
from 5°to 90° and ion energy of 100 eV were also performed to supplement the results.

   In each ion-injection simulation cycle, an ion is injected into the clean initial surface
with the predefined angle of incidence and kinetic energy. The initial position of the
incident ion is slightly above the material surface and its horizontal position is randomly
selected. The MD simulation of each ion injection cycle lasts for 2,000 fs. The simulation
is performed under the microcanonical conditions, i.e., with the total energy being con-
stant, for the first 300 fs. Subsequently, the system is gradually cooled by the Langevin
thermostat [43, 57] for 1,600 fs and then by the Berendsen thermostat [58] for the re-
maining 100 fs, so that the material temperature is brought back to 300 K, i.e., the initial
surface temperature, at the end of the ion-injection simulation cycle.
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                             27

   This ion injection cycle was repeated up to 10,000 times for statistical accuracy. In
each injection cycle, the simulation is performed with the same initial surface given in
Fig. 2.1 and no self-consistent change in the surface morphology due to the ion bombard-
ment was considered. Because a reflected ion, if there is any, typically leaves the surface
well before the cooling process starts (i.e., t < 300 fs with t being the simulation time in a
single cycle.), the cooling process employed in the simulation is unlikely to affect the ion
reflection properties examined in this study. However, the cooling process was performed
to ensure that thermally desorbed ions (or the corresponding inert-gas atoms after charge
neutralization) can be captured even if the injected ion is trapped in the material for an
extended period. In the simulation, the injected ion is considered to be reflected when
the z component of its velocity, v z , is positive and escapes the surface at the end of the
ion-injection cycle.




2.3     Results and Discussion

2.3.1     Angular distributions of reflected ions

We denote the probability of a reflected ion having kinetic energy E, reflection angle θr
(0◦ < θr < 90◦ ), and the azimuthal angle ϕa (−180◦ < ϕa < 180◦ ) by f (E, θr , ϕa ) such
that
                       Z ∞        Z 90◦         Z 180◦
                             dE           dθr            dϕa f (E, θr , ϕa ) = 1 .
                        0          0◦            −180◦

Due to the system symmetry, we have f (E, θr , ϕa ) = f (E, θr , −ϕa ).

   The reflection-angle distribution F (θr ) is defined as

                                          Z ∞        Z 180◦
                                 Nr
                       F (θr ) =                dE            dϕa f (E, θr , ϕa ) ,
                                 Nin      0           −180◦



where Nr and Nin denote the number of incident ions reflected on the surface and the
number of incident ions. It should be noted that incident ions may be trapped in the
28
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence
                                                                 Figure 2.3: Reflection-angle distributions F (θr ) of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red) and Xe+ (blue) ions reflected on the smooth and rough Si
                                                                 and SiO2 surfaces defined in Fig. 2.1. The ion incident energy is 1,000 eV and angles of incidence are 5°, 10° and 20°. The vertical black
                                                                 dashed line indicates the specular angle in θr . At 5°and 10°, the curves for Ar and Ne nearly overlap. Note that incident ions may be
                                                                                                                          trapped in the material.
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                               29

material and the integral of F (θr ) over the entire reflection-angle domain represents the
ion reflection probability. The reflection-angle distributions for 1,000 eV noble-gas ion
incidence on the smooth and rough Si and SiO2 surfaces of Fig. 2.1 are plotted in Fig. 2.3.

   For the smooth surface, the specular reflection is likely to take place. Indeed the
reflection-angle distributions peaked at 5° and 10° on smooth Si and SiO2 surfaces for all
incident ion species examined here when the incident angles were 5° and 10°. Regardless of
the incident ionic species or surface conditions, the reflection-angle distribution broadens
with a decreasing ion incident angle. For a smaller incidence angle (i.e., an angle closer
to the normal incidence), the incident ion is more likely to penetrate the material, rather
than to be scattered on the material surface.

   It is seen that the reflection-angle distribution on SiO2 is broader than that on the
Si surfaces under the otherwise same conditions. This can be attributed to the fact that
the smooth SiO2 surface has a small measure of roughness in comparison to the nearly
perfectly smooth crystalline Si surface at 300 K. Introducing a 1 nm surface roughness
to both Si and SiO2 further broadens the θr distributions. Additionally, a narrower θr
distribution for Xe+ ion incidence was observed in comparison to those for Ar+ or Ne+
ion incidence due to the much larger mass of Xe. At the same kinetic energy, a heavier
ion has a higher momentum and its path is less likely to be disturbed by the collision
with lighter Si atoms.

   The azimuthal-angle distribution G(ϕa ), which is defined as


                                      Z ∞        Z 90◦
                                Nr
                       G(ϕa ) =             dE           dθr f (E, θr , ϕa ) ,
                                Nin   0           0◦



of reflected ions for 1,000 eV noble-gas ion incidence on the smooth and rough Si and SiO2
surfaces are plotted in Fig. 2.4. It is seen that all azimuthal-angle distributions peak at
ϕa = 0, i.e., the direction of forward scattering. It should be noted that |ϕa |< 90◦ indicates
the forward scattering. It is seen that, at an incident angle of 20◦ , a relatively large number
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                            30

of Ne+ and Ar+ ions may result in backward scattering (i.e., |ϕa |> 90◦ ). In general, the
larger the angle of incidence (i.e., the smaller the grazing angle) becomes, the narrower the
azimuthal-angle distribution becomes. This is consistent with the observation of F (θr )
above that, at a lower angle of incidence, the reflection is more specular. It is also seen
in Fig. 2.4 that the rougher the surface is, the wider the azimuthal-angle distribution
becomes. The ion mass effect is also seen; the azimuthal-angle distribution of Xe+ ions
is narrower than that of Ar+ or Ne+ ions. The heavier mass of an ion and therefore the
higher momentum that the ion carries minimizes the deflection of the ion path when it
hits a rough surface.

   The mean kinetic energy E of reflected ions is defined by

                         Z ∞        Z 90◦         Z 180◦
                   E=          dE           dθr            dϕa E f (E, θr , ϕa ) .
                          0          0◦            −180◦



The mean kinetic energies of reflected ions from the smooth and rough surfaces of Si
and SiO2 are plotted as functions of the ion incident angle in Fig. 2.5. The incident ion
energy is 1,000 eV. The mean kinetic energy of reflected ions is seen to increase with the
increasing incident angle in all cases. Especially at 5° on the smooth surface, the energy
loss is relatively small since the interaction time is limited between the ion at grazing
incidence and surface atoms. In general, lighter ions tend to lose less energy than heavier
ions when they are reflected. Furthermore, ions reflected on the smooth surface tend
to lose less energy than those reflected on the rough surface because incident ions tend
to collide with a larger number of surface atoms when they are reflected on the rough
surface. However, it is seen that, at 20°, the kinetic energies of reflected Xe+ ions are
less affected by the surface roughness probably because, even on the smooth surface, they
tend to penetrate the material more deeply than in the cases of larger incident angles and
interact with surface atoms for a more extended period.
                                                                                                                                               Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence




Figure 2.4: Azimuthal-angle distributions G(ϕa ) of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red) and Xe+ (blue) ions reflected on the smooth and rough
Si and SiO2 surfaces defined in Fig. 2.1. The ion incident energy is 1,000 eV and angles of incidence are 5°, 10° and 20°. Because of
the symmetry G(ϕa ) = G(−ϕa ), G(ϕa ) is plotted only for positive ϕa . The angle of ϕa = 0 is the direction of specular reflection and
|ϕa |< 90◦ indicates the forward scattering. It is seen that, at an incident angle of 20◦ , Ne+ and Ar+ ion incidence may result in backward
scattering (i.e., |ϕa |> 90◦ ). At 5°and 10°, the curves for Ar and Ne nearly overlap. Note that incident ions may be trapped in the
                                                                    material.



                                                                                                                                               31
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                                32




    Figure 2.5: Mean kinetic energies of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red), and Xe+ (blue) ions
    reflected on smooth (represented by circles) and rough (squares) Si and SiO2 surfaces
    defined in Fig. 2.1, as functions of the angle of incidence. The ion incident energy is
                                            1,000 eV.


2.3.2      Reflection probabilities

The reflection probability is defined as the ratio of the number of reflected ions to the total
number of injected ions. The reflection probabilities of injected inert-gas ions are plotted
as functions of the incident angle in Fig. 2.6, where the incident ion energy is 1,000 eV. It
is seen that, at a lower incident angle of 5°or 10°, all ions have similar or nearly the same
reflection probabilities on each surface and the surface roughness somewhat decreased
the reflection probabilities. However, at 20°, the surface roughness hardly affected the
reflection probabilities and the reflection probabilities are significantly lower than those
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                                    33

at lower angles. This is because, at 1,000 eV incident energy with an incident angle of
20°, significant sputtering takes place and incident ions are more likely to be embedded
in the surface material.




    Figure 2.6: Reflection probabilities of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red), and Xe+ (blue) ions
    reflected on smooth (represented by circles) and rough (squares) Si and SiO2 surfaces
    defined in Fig. 2.1, as functions of the angle of incidence. The ion incident energy is
    1,000 eV. The data for Ne+ and Ar+ ions at 20° for the smooth and rough Si surfaces
    overlap. Similarly the data for Ne+ and Ar+ ions at 20° for the smooth and rough SiO2
    surfaces nearly overlap. At low incident angle (i.e., 5° or 10°), all ions have the same or
    similar reflection probabilities for each surface. The dotted and dashed lines are guides
                                             for the eye.


   The reflection probabilities of low-energy injected inert-gas ions are plotted as func-
tions of the incident angle in Fig. 2.7 for comparison, where the incident ion energy is
100 eV. It is seen that, at the oblique incident angles examined here, the reflection prob-
abilities of all ions are near unity regardless of the surface conditions. This is because
the incident energy is too small for the incident ions to penetrate the material. The
reflection-angle and azimuthal-angle distributions for 100eV noble-gas ion on smooth and
rough Si and SiO2 surfaces are shown in Appendix A.
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                                    34




    Figure 2.7: Reflection probabilities of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red), and Xe+ (blue) ions
    reflected on smooth (represented by circles) and rough (squares) Si and SiO2 surfaces
    defined in Fig. 2.1, as functions of the angle of incidence. The ion incident energy is
    100 eV. The reflection probabilities of all ions on each smooth surface overlap and are
    nearly unity. The reflection probabilities of all ions reflected on each rough surface also
               nearly overlap. The dotted and dashed lines are guides for the eye.


   It should be noted that such reflection of low-energy incident ions on a material
surface typically results from their multi-body collisions with the tightly bonded surface
atoms. For example, Fig. 2.8 shows the reflection probabilities of Ne+ , Ar+ , and Xe+
ions reflected on a smooth Si surface as functions of the angle of incidence, obtained from
MD and "Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter" (SRIM) [123–126] simulations. SRIM
is a binary-collision-based simulator for atomic motions. MD simulation results are the
same as those in Figs. 2.6 and 2.7 with Ar+ data being extended to 90°. It is seen that
the reflection probabilities obtained from SRIM are nearly the same between the cases
of 100 eV and 1,000 eV ion incident energies. Furthermore, the reflection probabilities
obtained from SRIM are significantly lower than those from MD simulations, especially
at low incident energy or large incident angles. This is because, in SRIM, the incident
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                              35




   Figure 2.8: Reflection probabilities of (a) Ne+ , (b) Ar+ , and (c) Xe+ ions reflected
   on a smooth Si surface as functions of the angle of incidence, obtained from MD and
   SRIM simulations with ion incident energies of 100 and 1,000 eV. MD simulation results
   are the same as those in Figs. 2.6 and 2.7 with Ar+ data being extended to 0°. The
   obtained reflection probabilities are seen to differ significantly between MD and SRIM
   simulations, especially at low incident energy or large incident angles. In each case,
   SRIM data at 100 eV and 1,000 eV nearly overlap. As discussed in the main text, the
   MD simulation results are considered to be more reliable than the SRIM simulation
                                            results.


ion only interacts with a single atom on the surface with which it is about to collide and
does not interact with other neighboring atoms on the surface simultaneously. Therefore,
the incident ion in SRIM simulations does not "see" the surface, i.e., an array of tightly
bonded atoms, and it penetrates the material unless it makes a backward scattering with
this collision. On the other hand, MD simulation can handle multi-body collisions and,
therefore, the incident ion interacts with multiple atoms on the surface simultaneously,
which may collectively prevent the incident ion from penetrating the material. The binary
collision assumption for ion injection into a material is typically valid only when the
colliding atom has sufficiently high kinetic energy. For this reason, the MD simulation
is considered to represent the surface collision and reflection processes more accurately
than the SRIM simulation.
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                             36

2.4     Conclusions

Molecular dynamics simulation of the scattering of Ne+ , Ar+ , and Xe+ ions at grazing
incidence (i.e., with the angle of incidence ≤ 20°) on smooth and rough Si and SiO2
surfaces were performed to evaluate their scattering properties. The ion incident energy
used in this study was 1,000 eV in most cases. The study was motivated to understand how
energetic ions interact with the sidewalls of HAR channels when they hit the sidewalls at
grazing incidence during RIE processes to form such channels. In RIE processes, incident
ions are typically reactive ions such as fluorocarbon ions. However, in this work, we
limited our interest to inert-gas ions to focus on the effects caused by physical impact.

   It is found from the MD simulations that the angular distributions of reflected ions
broaden more when the ion mass is lower, the incident angle is closer to the normal
incidence, or the surface is rougher. The mean kinetic energy of reflected ions increases
with the ion incident angle. Especially when the surface is smooth, the ion mass is
low, or the incident ion grazing angle is small, the mean kinetic energy of reflected ions
becomes close to the incident ion energy and the reflection becomes nearly specular. The
surface roughness reduces the mean kinetic energy of reflected ions, especially at grazing
incidence. In general, a crystalline Si surface is smoother than a typical smooth SiO2
surface at the atomic level. Therefore, on a smooth crystalline Si surface, the angular
distribution of reflected ions is slightly less broad and the mean kinetic energy of reflected
ions is slightly higher than those on a smooth SiO2 surface. The reflection probability
also increases as the angle of incidence increases. Especially, the reflection probabilities
of all ions examined in this study scattered on a flat surface are close to unity at an ion
incident angle of 5°. When the incident ion energy is as low as 100 eV, the reflection
probabilities of all incident ions are close to unity as the incident ions do not have enough
energy to penetrate the material.

   The reflection probabilities evaluated with SRIM simulations are typically much smaller
than those obtained from MD simulations. Because SRIM is based on a binary collision
Chapter 2. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence                               37

model, the incident ion in SRIM simulation interacts only with a single atom on the ma-
terial surface and cannot be repelled collectively by the surrounding surface atoms even if
its incident kinetic energy is not sufficient to pass through the narrow interatomic space
of the material surface.

   It should be noted that all data obtained in this study were those on the surfaces
defined in Fig. 2.2; the surface morphologies and other conditions were not modified self-
consistently by the incident ion impact for the sake of simplicity. For practical applications
of our interest, i.e., scattering of chemically reactive incident ions such as fluorocarbon ions
on sidewall surfaces of HAR channels, the surfaces are modified by not only the incident-
ion impact but also the redeposition of chemically reactive species arriving from the
plasma or other areas of the sidewalls as sputtered or desorbed species. The present study
is the first step toward a more comprehensive understanding of such complex scattering
phenomena of chemically reactive species.
Chapter 3


Molecular Dynamics Simulation of
Oxide-Nitride Bilayer Etching with
Energetic Fluorocarbon Ions


3.1     Introduction

The 3D NAND flash memory technology emerged when the scaling of planar NAND
devices can no longer address the demand for larger memory storage [6]. The idea behind
3D NAND devices is to stack memory cells vertically to increase the memory density per
area. There are various 3D NAND structures developed in the industry today such as the
Terabit Cell Array Transistor (TCAT) and the Bit-Cost Scalable (BiCS). The fabrication
of 3D NAND devices starts with the deposition of alternating thin films on the substrate.
The types of deposited films depend on the design of the device; for example, a multi-layer
stack of alternating silicon dioxide (SiO2 ) and silicon nitride (SiN) layers is known as an
ONON layer. The number of deposited layers in such a stack determines the memory
capacity of the fabricated 3D NAND devices [6]. After the formation of a multi-layer
stack, the next process is high-aspect-ratio (HAR) etching to form deep holes through

                                            39
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                           40

the stack. The HAR etching is preceded by the deposition of a hard mask patterned
with holes to allow the etching of deep hole channels [17]. The purpose of HAR etching
is to create hole channels with smooth and straight sidewall profiles. The HAR etching
is the main roadblock in 3D NAND device fabrication due to the increasing difficulty
in maintaining ideal hole channel profiles and avoiding issues, e.g., bowing, tapering,
twisting, and incomplete etch, with increasing aspect ratios [24]. The goal of this study
is to understand the fundamental properties of the ONON layer etching by energetic
reactive ions. Reactive ion etching (RIE), i.e. etching of materials by energetic ion
impact combined with surface chemical reactions [20, 80] is used for HAR etching in the
fabrication of 3D NAND devices. Energetic ions used for RIE are typically generated
in chemically reactive plasmas [27, 28, 76–79]. To achieve this goal, we use molecular
dynamics (MD) simulation [94, 95, 127] to study the interaction of incident chemically
reactive ions with surface atoms.

   Fluorocarbon or carbon fluoride (CF) plasmas are typically used in SiO2 and SiN
etching. It has been known that CF-containing surface-material layers (which we call
“mixing layers”) are formed on the material surface during such etching processes and can
facilitate surface etching reactions by forming silicon fluorides (SiFx ) and other volatile
molecular species. For example, with MD simulations, Abrams and Graves showed MD
simulation results of Si etching by CF3 + (≤ 200eV) ions wherein a fluorocarbosilyl layer
forms on the Si surface [128]. Smirnov et al. showed that SiO2 etching proceeded with and
without CF-polymer layer formation by low-energy ions [129]. Rauf et al. demonstrated
MD simulation of layer-by-layer etching of Si and SiO2 by fluorocarbon and Ar+ ions
[130]. Miyake et al. found that the electronegativity of fluorine (F), which weakens the
carbon (C) –carbon bond and strengthens the carbon-fluorine bond of C–C–F or C=C–F
structures strongly affects the nature of polymer deposition and, therefore, the formation
of the mixing layer during etching [60].

   Mass-selected ion beam experiments have been used to characterize the etching prop-
erties of SiO2 , SiN, and other materials [38]. For example, Karahashi et al. presented
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                          41

the sputtering yields of SiO2 by F+ and fluorocarbon ions as functions of the incident ion
energy [119] and Yanai et al. presented those of SiN [120]. Ito et al. examined hydrogen
effects in CF-based etching of SiN [121].

   In this study, we focus on the etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with a high
energy range (up to 2000eV). Specifically, we are interested in the etching of a SiO2 and
SiN (ON) bilayer, which represents a part of the ONON multilayer used in 3D NAND
devices, and how the etch rate changes as the etch front passes the bilayer interface. From
such simulations, we aim to understand how the multi-layer structure can affect the final
etched profiles of HAR deep holes.




3.2     Methodology

In this study, we employed classical MD simulation to study the RIE of SiO2 , SiN, and
SiO2 -SiN bilayers by CF3 + ions at various incident ion energies ranging from 200eV to
2000eV. In classical MD, Newton’s equations of motion are numerically integrated to
determine the orbits of all atoms in the system [94, 127]. The interatomic potential
functions that we used for this study atoms are based on Stillinger-Weber potentials
[48, 49] which were modified to include all necessary two-body and three-body interactions
for the Si-O-N-C-F system. The modified potentials have been used in earlier studies
[45, 53, 60–72].

   The model of a SiO2 film (Fig. 3.1a) was created by placing Si and O atoms to
form a pseudo cristobalite structure [74] in a rectangular box with a surface area of
17.5nm2 (4.19nm x 4.19nm). The initial depth was set to optimize the computational
time, depending on the incident energy of ions injected into the film, e.g., 3.49nm for
200eV to 5.58nm for 2000eV. The periodic boundary conditions were imposed in the
horizontal directions, such that the model represented an infinitely wide thin layer of a
SiO2 film. The model of a SiN film was also formed similarly with a stoichiometry of
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                              42




   Figure 3.1: Sideview images of the (a) SiO2 , (b) SiN, and (c) oxide-nitride bilayer
   model surface materials. In (c), it should be noted that the bottom nitride layer is
   assumed to be infinitely thick. As the etching simulation proceeds, more materials are
                                   added from the bottom.


Si3 N4 (Fig. 3.1b) by placing Si and N atoms in a rectangular box with a surface area
of 15.7nm2 (4.04nm x 3.88nm) and an initial depth of 2.25nm. The periodic boundary
conditions were also imposed in the horizontal directions. Both SiO2 and SiN films were
then thermalized at 300K.

   The model of a SiO2 -SiN bilayer (Fig. 3.1c), which we referred to as an ON bilayer,
was then created by placing a 4.85nm thick SiO2 on top of a 2.25nm thick SiN layer with
a stoichiometry of Si3 N4 in a rectangular simulation box with a surface area of 15.7nm2
(4.04nm x 3.88nm). These layers are thinner than those typically used in 3D NAND
ONON structures [14], to enable MD simulations with reasonable computation times.
The periodic boundary conditions were imposed in the horizontal directions. The SiO2
layer was originally formed on a surface area of 4.19nm x 4.19nm, as discussed above,
and then placed in the rectangular simulation with a bottom area of 4.04nm x 3.88nm,
with slight compression in the horizontal directions initially. The ON bilayer model film
was then thermalized at 300K for 10ps, resulting in a film with a total depth of 6.63nm.

   The atoms of the bottom 2 mono layers of each model film were fixed in position
(which we call an anchor layer) to prevent a downward drift of the model film during
the simulation of ion injection. During the simulation, an additional material layer was
added to the model film from the bottom when the film was deemed to be too thin.
The atoms in the anchor layer before the addition of the bottom material layer also
served as the binding sites for the atoms of the added layer and were then allowed to
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                           43

move according to the interatomic forces. The new anchor layer was then created at
the bottom of the added new layer. The model film was deemed too thin when incident
ions and/or knocked-on material atoms reach the region near the anchor layer, or the
thermal energy of the material becomes higher than the predetermined value after an ion
injection. This is because the model film to be etched by ion impact has to be sufficiently
wide and deep, such that the momentum and energy transferred from an injected ion are
transported unimpeded by phonons and thermal conduction away from the position of
impact. Whenever a new bottom layer is added during simulation, the entire film model
was again thermalized at 300K.

   The etching simulation consists of a series of injection cycles. Each injection cycle
begins by injecting a CF3 + ion at normal incidence into a random horizontal position
on the material surface with predetermined kinetic energy. In our MD simulation, as in
earlier studies of MD simulation of etching, we do not consider the electrical charges of
ions as part of interatomic forces and treat energetic ions as the corresponding neutral
species having the same kinetic energies. This is because we assume that charged species
are neutralized on the surface by the Auger effect at the moment of impact. To save
simulation time, the ion is injected from a position just above the material surface where
the incident ion is not interacting with surface atoms. Typically, in each injection cycle,
we inject only a single CF3 + ion.

   Each injection cycle is typically 2000fs long. For the first 300fs, the total system
(i.e., material surface and the injected ion) is allowed to evolve under the microcanonical
(NVE) conditions, where the number of all atoms, the simulation volume, and the total
energy of the system are conserved. In this period, the kinetic energy transfer from
the ion to the material and the subsequent collision cascade occur. The positions and
velocities of the atoms are calculated using the velocity-Verlet algorithm [131, 132] with a
variable timestep of 0.2 – 0.5fs. The timestep is varied depending on the fastest calculated
velocity and selected to be small enough for good conservation of the total energy of
the system. Following the 300fs NVE conditions, the system is artificially cooled to
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                            44

300K by gradually decreasing the velocity of all atoms for 1600fs using the Langevin
thermostat [57] and for 100s using the Berendsen thermostat [58, 59]. This artificial
cooling represents the process of energy dissipation in the system. Because we use a
small model surface material, the total energy is conserved under the NVE conditions.
In reality, the surface is much wider and deeper, so all energy and momentum transfer
from the incident ion to the surface material is transported and dissipates from the
position of impact to the outer region, so the material around the location of impact
cools down gradually until it is subject to another ion impact. For a small area used for
our simulation, it typically takes microseconds to milliseconds for the next ion to hit the
same area. In our simulation, we shortened this slow cooling or thermal relaxation period
to 1700fs to achieve computational efficiency.

   At the end of a single injection cycle, all atoms that are above the surface and not
bonded with the surface atoms are removed as desorbed species. The etching yield or
sputtering yield of a specific species (such as Si), i.e., the average number of the desorbed
or reflected species by a single ion impact, is evaluated from the number of such desorbed
species. After the removal of desorbed species, a new injection cycle starts using the ion
irradiated material surface of the present cycle. In this way, the time evolution of the sur-
face conditions during the etching process is also self-consistently simulated. For typical
etching simulations, the injection cycles are repeated for thousands of cycles, such that
statistical averages of physical quantities of our concern (such as etching yields) can be
taken and compared with experimentally observed values of the corresponding quantities.
Unless otherwise specified, we continue the simulations until the system reaches steady
state, where the averaged etching yields of all atomic species and surface conditions no
longer change as the ion dose increases.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                            45

3.3     Results and Discussions


3.3.1    Etching of SiO2 and SiN

MD simulations of the etching of SiO2 and SiN model surfaces by CF3 + ions were per-
formed to evaluate the etching yields and the formation of CF-containing mixing layers.
Here we define the etching yield for each species, e.g., Si, O, C, and F in the case of SiO2
etching by CF3 + ions, more specifically as the average number of removed or reflected
atoms from the surface per ion injection. In the case of SiO2 etching by CF3 + ions, if the
system is in steady state, the etching yields of Si and O are positive and those of C and
F are 1 and 3 so that no accumulation of C or F atoms occurs on the surface.

   Figure 3.2 shows the instantaneous etching yields of (a) SiO2 and (c) SiN by 500eV
CF3 + ions for all atomic species of the systems and the corresponding changes in depth
for (b) SiO2 and (d) SiN as functions of the ion dose obtained from MD simulations with
the model surfaces of Fig. 3.1(a) and (b). The angle of ion incidence is normal to the
film surface. Here the instantaneous etching yield is defined as the running average of
the removed or reflected atoms from the surface over 50 ion injections into the model
material surface. The steady-state etching is seen to be attained after 0.5x1016 ions/cm2 ,
wherein the average removed C and F corresponds to the numbers of injected atoms per
cycle, i.e., 1 and 3. Furthermore, we define the “etch rate” of the surface material as the
etched depth per unit ion dose, i.e., the slope of the etched surface position as a function
of the ion dose, as shown in Fig. 3.2(b) and (d).

   The etching yields of SiO2 and SiN for Si atoms obtained from MD simulation are
plotted as functions of the ion incident energy in Fig. 3.3. The etching yields are evaluated
in steady state. For comparison, etching yields of SiO2 [119] and SiN [120] by CF3 + ions
obtained from ion beam experiments are also shown in Fig. 3.3. It is seen that the
simulation and experiment yields are in good agreement for both SiO2 and SiN, which
corroborates the relevance of the interatomic potential functions used in this study.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                             46




   Figure 3.2: Instantaneous etching yields (a) SiO2 and (c) SiN by 500eV CF3 + ions for
   all atomic species of the systems and the corresponding changes in depth for (b) SiO2
   and (d) SiN as functions of the ion dose obtained from MD simulations. The angle of
                          ion incidence is normal to the film surface.




   Figure 3.3: The etching yields of SiO2 and SiN in steady state for Si atoms by
   CF3 + ions as functions of incident ion energy obtained from MD simulations and ion
   beam experiments. The experimental yield values are taken from Ref. 119 for SiO2 and
                                      Ref. 120 for SiN.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                               47

   The etch rates of SiO2 and SiN obtained from MD simulations are also plotted as
functions of the ion incident energy in Fig. 3.4. It is seen that the etch rate for SiO2 is
higher than that of SiN even though Fig. 3.3 shows that the Si etching yield of SiN is
higher than that of SiO2 . This is because the atomic density of SiN is higher than that of
SiO2 ; it is required to remove more Si atoms to etch the same thickness of SiN as SiO2 .




    Figure 3.4: The etch rates as functions of the ion energy for the etching of SiO2 and
    SiN by CF3 + ion irradiation obtained from MD simulation. The etch rate is defined
     here as the etched depth per unit ion dose and given in units of nm/(1016 ions/cm2 ).



   Figure 3.5 shows the depth profiles of atomic densities of SiO2 (a) – (d) and SiN (e) –
(h) etched by CF3 + ion irradiation at an ion dose of 4.0x1016 ions/cm2 for both materials.
The depth is measured from the position of the top surface of the model material before
etching. Note that the scales of vertical axes of Fig. 3.5 are not the same among different
depth profiles. It is seen that much of C and F is deposited near the top surface. This
layer, where C and F atoms coexist with surface Si and O or N atoms, is the mixing layer,
as stated earlier. In this layer, chemical reactions take place during the etching process,
which may facilitate the etching of SiO2 and SiN by forming volatile species. It is seen
in Fig. 3.5 that the mixing layer is typically a few nanometers thick, and its thickness
varies with the ion incident energy and surface material. It is observed that the densities
of accumulated C and F atoms in SiO2 and SiN decrease with increasing ion energy. This
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                           48

is because, at sufficiently high incident ion energy, the etching of the material surface
supersedes the deposition of C and F atoms. Especially at 200eV, as seen in Fig. 3.5 (a)
and (e), the C and F densities near the top surface are much higher than the Si and O
or N densities, indicating the deposition of a CF polymer layer on top of the SiO2 or SiN
surface. At higher ion energies, however, CF polymer is hardly seen, especially in SiO2 ,
as the density of C atoms remaining in the surface region decreases with the increasing
ion energy.

   In contrast to the densities, the thickness of the mixing layer increases with increasing
ion energy. This is because, the higher the energy is, the deeper the ions can penetrate.
The mixing layer thicknesses in SiO2 and SiN at the onset of steady-state etching measured
at ion doses of 0.57x1016 ions/cm2 and 0.64x1016 ions/cm2 , respectively, are plotted as
functions of the ion energy in Fig. 3.6.

   Figure 3.7 and 3.8 show the depth profiles of bond densities of SiO2 and SiN re-
spectively etched by CF3 + ion irradiation at an ion dose of 4.0x1016 ions/cm2 for both
materials. The bond density profiles correspond to the atomic density profiles in Fig. 3.5.
Bonds whose densities are negligibly small such as carbon-carbon double bonds (C=C)
are not plotted here. It is observed in Fig. 3.7(a) that, at 200eV, the deposited C and F
atoms on SiO2 are comprised primarily of those of C-F, C-C, C-O, and Si-F bonds. The
dominance of the C-C and C-F bonds near the top of the surface shows the formation of
a CF polymer layer there. As the ion energy increases further, the C-C and C-F bond
densities decrease, which is consistent with the low C densities at such high ion energies
observed in Fig. 3.5. At such high energies, deposited F atoms are mostly bonded with
Si atoms.

   The results for SiN are similar to those for SiO2 except that more C tends to remain
in SiN than in SiO2 , especially at higher energies, as we saw in Fig. 3.5. In SiN, the Si-C
bond density increases with the increasing ion energy whereas, in SiO2 , it decreases with
the increasing ion energy beyond 500eV.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                    49




   Figure 3.5: The depth profiles of atomic densities during steady-state etching of (a)
   – (d) SiO2 and (e) – (h) SiN by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies of 200eV,
   500eV, 1000eV, and 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The depth profiles were
   taken at an ion dose of 4.0x1016 ions/cm2 for both SiO2 and SiN. The origin of the
   vertical axis is the position of the material’s top surface prior to etching. Note the scale
   and position of the vertical axis vary among different profiles. Except for the absolute
   values of the depth, the relative positions of the atomic density profiles and their shapes
                           hardly change during steady-state etching.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                   50




    Figure 3.6: The mixing layer thicknesses as functions of the ion energy for SiO2 and
    SiN etched by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies of 200eV, 500eV, 1000eV, and
    2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The thickness was measured from the depth
    profiles at the onset of steady state etching, i.e., at the ion dose of 0.57x1016 ions/cm2
                            for SiO2 and 0.64x1016 ions/cm2 for SiN.


   As seen in Fig. 3.5(a) – (d), the O density near the top surface decreases with the
increasing incident ion energy and becomes close to the Si density, indicating preferential
sputtering of O from the SiO2 surface. This is consistent with the increase of the Si-Si
bond density in SiO2 as the incident ion energy increases. Similarly, as seen in Fig. 3.5(e)
– (h), the N density near the top surface decreases with the increasing incident ion energy
and becomes close to or even lower than the Si density, indicating preferential sputtering
of N from the SiN surface. This is also consistent with the increase of the Si-Si bond
density in SiN as the incident ion energy increases.

   The desorbed species or etched products of the SiO2 and SiN model materials by CF3 +
ion etching were also studied. From the desorbed species, we could infer the surface
chemical reactions that occur during etching. The number of specific species removed
from the surface per ion injection is counted and normalized by the total number of all
removed species per ion injection. These ratios of all desorbed species accumulated up
to a dosage of 4.0x1016 ions/cm2 for both SiO2 and SiN are plotted as percentages in
Fig. 3.9. Here the dominant desorbed species under some conditions are explicitly listed
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                51




   Figure 3.7: The depth profiles of bond densities during steady-state etching of SiO2
   by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies of (a) 200eV, (b) 500eV, (c) 1000eV, and
   (d) 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The bond depth profiles were taken at an
   ion dose of 4.0x1016 ions/cm2 and the origin of the vertical axis is the position of the
                    material’s top surface prior to etching, as in Fig. 3.5.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                52




   Figure 3.8: The depth profiles of bond densities during steady-state etching of SiN
   by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies of (a) 200eV, (b) 500eV, (c) 1000eV, and
   (d) 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The bond depth profiles were taken at an
   ion dose of 4.0x1016 ions/cm2 and the origin of the vertical axis is the position of the
                    material’s top surface prior to etching, as in Fig. 3.5.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                          53

while the species whose ratios are less than 3.2% under all conditions examined are listed
as “others.”

   For the etching of SiO2 , Si atoms are primarily removed as monoatomic Si or SiFx (1
≤ x ≤ 4) while O atoms are primarily removed as monoatomic O, O2 , CO, or CO2 . It
is observed that the desorption of Si, SiO, SiO2 , O, and O2 increases with increasing ion
energy. At 2000eV, 60% of the total desorbed species that contain atoms from the etched
material (i.e., Si or O) are monoatomic species (i.e. atomic Si and O) and diatomic
species (i.e. O2 , CO, and SiF). This suggests the dominance of physical sputtering at
higher incident ion energies. However, it is also seen that the desorption of SiFx (1 ≤ x
≤ 4), CO, and CO2 increase up to 500eV and then decrease as the incident ion energy
further increases. This observation is consistent with that of the beam study of SiO2
etching with CF3 + ions by Toyoda et al., where the desorption of SiF2 and CO increased
with the increasing ion energy, though their study was limited to 400eV [133]. Among all
desorbed species observed in the SiO2 etching simulation, volatile molecules, i.e., species
with no dangling bonds, were O2 , F2 , OF2 , CO, CO2 , COF2 , CF4 , C2 F2 , C2 F4 , C2 F6 ,
and SiF4 , which may be considered “stable” or hardly redeposit (or redeposit with low
sticking probabilities) when they interact with a material surface. In our simulation, such
volatile molecules accounted for 32%, 34%, 29% and 26% of the total desorbed species
for SiO2 etched by 200eV, 500eV, 1000eV, and 2000eV CF3 + ions, respectively. All other
desorbed species with dangle bonds are likely to deposit with high sticking probabilities
if they interact with a material surface.

   Additionally, among the desorbed SiFx (1 ≤ x ≤ 4), at 200eV ion irradiation, the
amount of desorbed species satisfies SiF4 > SiF3 > SiF2 > SiF while, at 2000eV, SiF4 <
SiF3 < SiF2 < SiF. Figure 3.7(a) shows that, at 200eV, the Si-F bond is concentrated
just below the CF polymer layer. As Si atoms desorb through the polymer layer, the
polymer layer may act as a steady source of F atoms and allows the desorbing Si atoms
to be bonded with more F atoms. The presence of the CF polymer may also account
for the fact that there are more sputtered or desorbed F, F2 , CF, and CF2 species at
54
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching   Figure 3.9: The ratios of desorbed species from (a) SiO2 and (b) SiN surfaces etched by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies
                                                 of 200eV, 500eV, 1000eV, and 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The ratios of desorbed SiFx (1 ≤ x ≤ 4) species from (c) SiO2 and
                                                 (e) SiN, and desorbed CFx (1 ≤ x ≤ 4) from (d) SiO2 and (f) SiN are also plotted. The ratio of a specific desorbed species is defined
                                                 as the total number of the specific desorbed species indicated in the horizontal axes divided by the total number of all desorbed species
                                                                                                           during the simulation.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                  55

200eV than at higher ion energies. This is also consistent with the study of Toyoda et al.
showing that the desorption of CF2 radicals decreases with the increasing ion energy [133].
As the ion energy increases from 500eV to 2000eV, the Si-F bond density (Fig. 3.7(b) –
(d)) decreases. Specifically, at 500eV or higher energies, the C-F bonds hardly exist.
Therefore, the desorption of highly fluorinated SiFx and CFx becomes less probable as
the ion energy increases.

   For the etching of SiN, Si atoms are primarily removed as monoatomic Si or SiFx (1
≤ x ≤ 4) while N atoms are primarily removed as monoatomic N, N2 , NFx , (1 ≤ x ≤
3), and CN. It is observed that the desorption Si, Six Ny (1 ≤ x ≤ 3, 1 ≤ y ≤ 4), N, and
N2 increases with the increasing ion energy. Also at 2000eV, monoatomic species and
diatomic species such as N, N2 , CN, Si, and SiF accounted for 52% of the total desorbed
species. However, the desorption of SiFx (x ≤ 4) and CN increases up to 500eV but then
decreases above 500eV while the desorption of NFx (x ≤ 3) decreases with the increasing
ion energy. Among all desorbed species observed in the SiN etching simulation, volatile
molecules (i.e., species without dangling bonds) were F2 , N2 , NF3 , CF4 , C2 F2 , C2 F4 , C2 F6 ,
and SiF4 , which accounted for 12%, 14%, 16%, and 19% of the total desorbed species
for the ion energies of 200eV, 500eV, 1000eV and 2000eV ion energy, respectively. Unlike
in the case of SiO2 etching, the percentage of these species increases with increasing ion
energy in the case of SiN etching. This increasing trend was primarily caused by the
increasing amount of N2 desorption with the increasing ion energy.

   Similar to the case of SiO2 etching, among the desorbed SiFx (1 ≤ x ≤ 4), at 200eV
ion irradiation, the amount of desorbed species satisfies SiF3 > SiF4 > SiF2 > SiF while,
at 2000eV, SiF > SiF2 > SiF3 > SiF4 for SiN etching. The desorption of F, F2 , CF, and
CF2 are also higher at 200eV than at higher ion energies for SiN etching. These facts
indicate that the etching of SiN becomes more physical sputtering than chemical etching
as the ion energy increases, as in the case of SiO2 .
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                               56

3.3.2     Etching of an Oxide-Nitride Bilayer

3.3.2.1   Etching Yields and Etch Rates


MD simulation of the ON bilayer etching with CF3 + ions was performed to examine
the etching process through a material interface. The instantaneous etching yields for all
removed or reflected atomic species are plotted as functions of the ion dose in Fig. 3.10(a)
– (d) and the corresponding changes in the position of the top surface are also plotted as
functions of the ion dose in Fig. 3.10(e) – (h). The origin of the vertical axis of Fig. 3.10(e)
– (h) represents the top surface position of the ON bilayer prior to etching. In Fig. 3.10(e)
– (h), the location of the SiO2 – SiN interface is indicated by the grey horizontal broken
line, which was 4.85nm below the original top surface. The slopes of the orange and green
solid lines indicate the steady state “etch rates” (i.e., etched depths per unit ion dose)
of the SiO2 and SiN model substrates by CF3 + ions at the corresponding ion incident
energy. The ion dose at which the N atoms start to desorb is indicated by the green
broken vertical line. The ion incident energy used for etching is indicated in each graph.
As in the single material etching discussed above, the angle of ion incidence is normal
to the surface. Additionally, the depth profiles of the atomic densities of the ON bilayer
etched by CF3 + ions with ion energies of 200eV to 2000eV are plotted in Fig. 3.11(a) –
(d). The depth profiles are plotted at the indicated ion dose. The horizontal dashed line
indicates the position of the interface between SiO2 and SiN.

   In the case of 200eV ion injection, it is seen in Fig. 3.10(a) that steady-state etching
is achieved prior to the etching of the underlying SiN layer, which is considered to occur
when the non-zero etching yield of N atoms starts to appear at around an ion dose of
2.7x1016 ions/cm2 . The oxide etching may be considered to have reached the steady state
when the average etching yields of C and F are close to 1 and 3, meaning no deposition
of C and F atoms takes place, and the time-averaged etching yields of Si and O hardly
change as functions of the ion dose. Figure 3.10(e) shows that the surface height went
down slightly when the ion injection started. We observed that, during this very initial
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                    57




   Figure 3.10: The instantaneous etching yield of each atomic species as a function of
   the ion dose for the ON bilayer etched by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies
   of (a) 200eV, (b) 500eV, (c) 1000eV and (d) 2000eV, and the corresponding change of
   the surface height (i.e., depth) as a function of ion dose with ion incident energies of (e)
   200eV, (f) 500eV, (g) 1000eV and (h) 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. In (e) –
   (h), the vertical dash line corresponds to the start of the removal of nitrogen, i.e., the
                              start of etching of the underlying SiN.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                58




    Figure 3.11: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for the etching of the ON
    bilayer by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies of (a) 200eV, (b) 500eV, (c)
    1000eV and (d) 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The depth profiles were taken
    at the ion doses indicated at the top of the graphs. The origin of the vertical axis is
    the position of the material’s top surface prior to etching. The horizontal dashed line
                 indicates the position of the interface between SiO2 and SiN.


phase, O atoms were preferentially removed from the SiO2 surface, and therefore the
volume of the model surface decreased initially. It is also seen in Fig. 3.10(a) that more
O atoms were removed than Si atoms initially. Before the etching reached the steady
state, C and F atoms are also seen to have accumulated, which formed the mixing layer.
The accumulation of C and F atoms eventually increased the surface height until around
an ion dose of about 0.4x1016 ions/cm2 , from which the surface height steadily decreased
because of the SiO2 etching. It is seen that the etch rate of the ON bilayer changes from
that of SiO2 , as indicated by the orange line, to that of SiN, as indicated by the green
line. This is because, at 200eV, the mixing layer thickness for pure SiO2 (3.0nm, as seen
in Fig. 3.6) is less than the thickness of the initial oxide layer (4.9nm). However, it should
be noted the etch rate slowed down even when the ion beam was still etching the SiO2
layer.

   As seen in Fig. 3.10(b) and (f), in the case of 500eV ion injection, the steady-state
etching of the oxide layer occurred after a short period of the mixing layer formation.
However, the duration of the steady-state etching of SiO2 was shorter than in the case
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                           59

of 200eV ion injection, and the etch rate changed to that of pure SiN at around a dose
of 0.97x1016 ions/cm2 . In this case, the mixing layer of pure SiO2 for 500eV (4.3nm) was
slightly less than the initial thickness of the SiO2 layer.

   As seen in Fig. 3.10(c) and (g), at 1000 eV, the underlying SiN layer was already being
etched at a low dosage of 0.5x1016 ions/cm2 as evidenced by the removed nitrogen seen
in Fig. 3.10(c). In this case, the mixing layer of pure SiO2 (5.1nm) was slightly thicker
than the oxide layer thickness. As such, there was a mixing of the oxide and nitride layers
from the very beginning. Once nitrogen started to be removed, even when less than half
of the oxide layer was etched, the etch rate of the ON bilayer already followed that of
pure SiN.

   At 2000eV, as seen in Fig. 3.10(d), the underlying SiN layer is already etched at a
low dose of 0.07x1016 ions/cm2 . Fig. 3.10(h) shows that the etch rate hardly followed
that of pure SiO2 . Unlike in the 200eV case, the oxide and nitride layers were mixed well
before the etch front reached the interface. The mixing of the oxide and nitride layers is
evidenced by the depth profile of atomic densities shown in Fig. 3.11(d). It is seen that
the O atoms reached about 4nm beyond the interface. Because the nitride layer is much
thicker than the oxide layer, the etch rate immediately followed that of pure SiN even
with a small amount of O present in the SiN layer.

   The ON bilayer examined here has a thin SiO2 layer over an infinitely thick SiN layer.
Therefore, when the single etch rate appeared at sufficiently high ion incident energy, it
was the etch rate of SiN. In the case of a multiple alternating SiO2 and SiN layer, i.e.,
an ONON layer, the simulation results above suggest that, if the ONON layer is etched
with sufficiently high ion energy, a single average etch rate between the etch rates of SiO2
and SiN would appear, depending on the thicknesses of their layers. If the thicknesses
of ONON multilayers are not uniform over the horizontal cross-sectional area of a HAR
etched hole, a non-uniform etch rate over the etched-hole cross-section can appear, which
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                         60

we speculate may cause a bending of the HAR etched hole as the etch front passes through
dozens of multilayers.



3.3.2.2   Desorbed Species from the ON bilayer Etching


Figure 3.12 shows the accumulated desorbed species or etch products from a unit area of
the ON bilayer etched by CF3 + ions as functions of the ion dose for various ion energies.
Plotted in (a) are the most dominant O-containing desorbed species. The curves of O-
containing desorbed species become flat once O atoms are depleted from the surface. It
is seen that, with increasing ion energy, more oxygen was removed as O or O2 while
the desorbed amounts of CO and CO2 decreased. Plotted in (b) are the most dominant
N-containing desorbed species. Note that the scale of the vertical axis of (b) is much
smaller than that of (a). As in (a), with increasing ion energy, more N and N2 desorbed
while the among of desorbed NFx (1 ≤ x ≤ 3) decreased. The amounts of NF2 and NF3
were much smaller than that of NF for all ion energies examined here. At 2000eV, only
NF appeared as desorbed species among NFx . NO molecules desorbed at all energies but
were much fewer than N, N2 , and NF. Plotted in (c) are the most dominant Si-containing
desorbed species. It is seen that, with increasing ion energy, the removal of monoatomic
Si increased while that of SiF4 molecules decreased. It should be noted that the trends
are opposite between the 200eV and 2000eV cases. In the case of 200eV, the desorbed
amount of SiF4 is the highest followed by those of SiFx species with decreasing number
x of bonded F atoms with the desorbed amount of monoatomic Si as the lowest. In
contrast, in the case of 2000eV, the desorbed amount of the monoatomic Si is the highest
followed by those of SiFx species with the increasing number x of bonded F.

   The trend observed in the desorbed species for the ON bilayer etching is similar to
the trend of the desorbed species of individual SiO2 and SiN. The main difference is the
presence of NO among the desorbed species. In actual HAR deep hole etching, volatile
species such as CO, CO2 , O2 , NF3 , and SiF4 , may leave the hole without sticking to the
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                                61




   Figure 3.12: The accumulated numbers of desorbed species emitted from a unit
   area of the ON bilayer surface etched by CF3 + ion irradiation with incident energies of
   200eV, 500eV, 1000eV, and 2000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The horizontal axis
   represents the ion dose. Only dominant species among (a) oxygen-containing desorbed
   species, (b) nitrogen-containing desorbed species, and (c) silicon-containing desorbed
   species are plotted. The vertical dash lines correspond to the start of the removal of
                     nitrogen, i.e., start of etching of the underlying SiN.
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                           62

wall whereas other desorbed species with dangling bonds such as O and SiFx with 1 ≤
x ≤ 3 may be redeposited on the sidewalls, which may cause tapering, as schematically
illustrated in Fig. 3.13. However, this figure is not meant to imply that the redeposition
is the sole cause of tapering. In reality, the flux of incident ions that reaches the bottom
of a HAR channel as well as the transport of gas-phase radicals along the channel can
also greatly affect the resulting profile of the HAR channel.




    Figure 3.13: Schematic diagram of a possible mechanism of the formation of tapered
                             HAR channels in 3D NAND.




3.4     Conclusions

In this study, MD simulations of etching of SiO2 , SiN, and ON bilayer model materials by
energetic CF3 + ions were performed. In the etching of SiO2 and SiN separate materials,
good agreement between the experimental and the simulation etching yields was attained.
In the ON bilayer etching, when the incident ion energy is low, the etch rates of oxide and
nitride layers were observed separately since the thickness of the mixing layer is less than
the initial thickness of the oxide layer. At high incident ion energies where the mixing
layer is much thicker than the initial oxide layer, the mixture of oxide and nitride layers
resulted in the single etch rate of the thicker underlying SiN layer. The results suggest
Chapter 3. MD Simulation of ON Bilayer Etching                                          63

that, in the case of an ONON multilayer, the overall etch rate is expected to depend
on the thicknesses of oxide and nitride layers as well as the ion incident energy. It is
possible that, in the HAR deep hole etching of an ONON multilayer for 3D NAND device
manufacturing, non-uniform layer thicknesses may result in spatially dependent etch rates
across the horizontal cross-section of each hole, which could lead to the deflection of the
etch front passing through the oxide-nitride interfaces and bend the etched hole channel.
The desorbed species obtained from the simulations showed that the number of desorbed
monoatomic species or small moieties with fewer chemical bonds increased with increasing
ion energy. In HAR deep hole etching, desorbed species with dangling bonds are likely
to be redeposited on the sidewalls of the hole channels.
Chapter 4


Molecular Dynamics Simulation of
Oxide and Nitride Etching by CF3+
and Cl+


4.1     Introduction

The 3D NAND flash memory devices has been the leading solution to any platforms
that require high memory capacity (e.g. smartphones, laptops, etc.). In light of this,
further scaling of 3D NAND is required. The simplest method of increasing the memory
capacity of 3D NAND is by increasing the number of alternating films (e.g. SiO2 and
SiN) that form the memory cells. In the fabrication process of 3D NAND, pillars that
goes through all deposited films must be created. As such, etching hole channels with
high aspect ratio (HAR) and straight profiles is needed. However, creating a straight
profile becomes more difficult as the aspect-ratio increases. As the aspect ratio increases,
the flux of reactive species would have difficulty in reaching the bottom of the channel
causing the RIE lag, and in some cases, an etch stop [24, 25]. Imperfect profile shapes
such as tapering, bowing, necking, and incomplete etch has a higher tendency to occur

                                            65
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                         66

as the aspect-ratio increases. Due to this, HAR etching has been known as the main
roadblock to further scaling of 3D NAND flash memory devices [5, 6, 17, 24].

   Fluorocarbon plasma is commonly used in HAR etching and other etching processes
in the semiconductor industry [27, 28, 32]. It is well known that in fluorocarbon plasma
etching, the fluorine-to-carbon (F/C) ratio of the reactive species in the plasma would
greatly affect whether deposition of the fluorocarbon (FC) film or the etching of the ma-
terial would occur [32–34]. In light of this, this chapter focuses on exploring other species
that can be incorporated in fluorocarbon plasma etching. In particular, this chapter
studies the effect of adding Cl+ ions to the commonly used fluorocarbon plasma in the
etching SiO2 and SiN through molecular dynamics (MD). To the best of the author’s
knowledge, MD simulation combining chlorine with fluorocarbon has not been done be-
fore. As such, interatomic potential that would model the interaction of chlorine with
carbon and fluorine has been developed.




4.2        MD Simulation

Classical MD has been employed to simulate the etching of SiO2 and SiN with chlorine-
containing fluorocarbon plasma. With classical MD, Newton’s equations of motions are
numerically solved to determine the motion of the atoms. The behaviour of the atoms
is defined by the forces acting on them. These forces can be described by interatomic
potential models [39, 43, 46]. In this study, the interatomic potential model used is
based on Stillinger-Weber (SW) potentials [48, 49]. The SW-potentials has been modified
to include the two-body and three-body interactions for SiO2 and SiN interacting with
fluorocarbon and chlorine separately [45, 60, 62, 63, 74]. Interatomic potential models
that include interaction of chlorine with fluorocarbon has not been develop. As such,
the development of F–C–Cl interatomic potential model would be discussed in the next
section.
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                         67

   MD simulations of Si, SiO2 , and SiN etching by Cl+ injected at normal incidence with
ion energies from 50eV to 3,000eV were done. The etching simulation with just Cl+ were
done to verify the interatomic potential model that was developed for Cl. The model Si
film was created by placing Si atoms to form a diamond crystal structure in a rectangular
box with a surface area of 18.84nm2 (4.34nm x 4.34nm). The model SiO2 and SiN films
were created in a similar manner as the films used in Ref. 117 with surface areas of 17.5nm2
(4.19nm x 4.19nm) and 15.7nm2 (4.04nm x 3.88nm) respectively. A 0.5nm layer of atoms
from the bottom of the films are fixed to prevent lateral displacement of the simulation
box. The fixed layer also serves as the bonding sites for adding new film layers called
’anchor’. Since additional film layers can be added, the height of the film is theoretically
infinite. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in the horizontal directions such that
an actual surface can be mimicked. All films are thermalized at 300K before ion injection,
and whenever an anchor is added. To understand the etching mechanism of SiO2 and SiN
with chlorine-containing fluorocarbon plasma, MD simulations by alternating injection of
CF3 + and Cl+ were done. MD simulations by alternating injection of CF3 + and Ar+ were
also done to supplement the results.

   The SiO2 and SiN films were etched by alternating injection of CF3 + and Cl+ ions at
normal and 60° incidence with ion energies from 500eV to 2,000eV as shown in Fig. 4.1.
The 60° incident angle had been chosen based on previous simulations wherein the etching
of SiO2 by CF3 + with incident angle 0° – 85° showed the highest etch yield at 60° [47].
Though CF3 + and Cl+ are referred to as ions, they are actually treated as charge-neutral
species since electrical charges of ions were not considered in the interatomic potential
models. Electrical charges were not considered under the assumption that charged species
in the plasma are neutralized by the Auger effect upon interaction with the surface [73, 74].
After injecting the ion, the system is allowed to evolve for 300fs under microcanonical
N V E ensemble wherein the total-energy of the system is conserved. During this period,
the kinetic energy of from the ion is transferred to the film which subsequently causes
the collision cascade. As such, the volume-averaged temperature of the system increases.
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                             68

Films used in reality are much larger, and can readily dissipate the energy transferred
from the ion. However, the simulation box used in the simulation are much smaller. As
such, artificial cooling of the system was done to prevent unrealistic heating of the films.
Artificial cooling to 300K was done by gradually decreasing the velocities of all atoms for
1600fs using the Langevin thermostat [57] and for 100s using the Berendsen thermostat
[58, 59]. Atoms not bonded to the bulk of the film (i.e. positioned above the film) are
considered as etched products or desorbed species. These species are not cooled, are
allowed to move without changing its velocities until the end of the cycle. Each injection
cycle lasts for 2,000fs with a variable time step of of 0.2 – 0.5fs. The time step changes
in accordance to the velocity of the fastest atom, and is small enough such that the total
energy of the system can be conserved. At each time step, the positions and velocities
of the atoms are calculated using the velocity-Verlet algorithm [131, 132]. At the end of
injection cycle, the desorbed species are removed. The resulting film would then be used
for the next cycle. The injection cycle is repeated continuously until relevant macroscopic
properties such as the etch yield can be obtained with sufficient statistical accuracy.




    Figure 4.1: Sideview images of the (a) SiO2 and (b) SiN model films etched by
    alternating injection of CF3 + and Cl+ injected at incident angle θi of 0° (normal) and
                                             60°.
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                                                  69

4.3     Interatomic Potential Model for Fluorocarbon and

        Chlorine Interaction

In this section, an interatomic potential model for the interaction of chlorine with carbon
and fluorine was developed for the etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + and Cl+ . The inter-
atomic potential models for all other interactions are the same models used in previous
studies shown in Refs. 45, 53, 60–72.

   The interatomic potential model for Cl–C–F interaction is based on SW-type potential
where the total potential energy Φ is given as the summation of the two-body V2 and
three-body V3 interactions as shown in Eq. 4.1 [48, 49]. In this SW-type potential model,
all atoms are considered as charge-neutral species.

                                          X                    X
                                   Φ=           V2 (i, j) +              V3 (i, j, k)                            (4.1)
                                          i<j                 i<j<k




   The calculations for the interatomic potential model is based on previous studies
[45, 74, 110, 115] wherein Eq. 4.1 is parameterized. The two-body V2 interaction between
the i th and j th atoms would be dependent on their interatomic distance rij , and is given
by the repulsive VR and attractive or bonding VB interaction between the two atoms.
                                                             
                                                   −p    c
                                         VR = ar exp
                                                      r − rc
                                                                                                               (4.2)
                                                 −q        d
                                         VB = −br exp
                                                        r − rc

Assuming that VR is linearly dependent on the square of VB (p = 2q and c = 2d), the
two-body V2 interaction is given by

                                                                                          
                                                2d                                    d
            V2 (i, j) = ar   −2q
                                   exp                      − br   −q
                                                                        exp                      , if rij < rc   (4.3)
                                             rij − rc                             rij − rc
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                         70

      Table 4.1: Calculated parameter values for the two-body V2 interaction of C–Cl.

                             Parameters     Values   Units
                                 a          548.92 (eV)2q /Å
                                 b           86.40 (eV)q /Å
                                 q            1.39
                                 d           3.93     Å
                                 rc          3.99     Å

    Table 4.2: Calculated parameter values for the two-body repulsive VR interaction of
                                         C–Cl.

                                  Parameters Values
                                      a      27951.76
                                      p        0.75
                                      c        10.17
                                      rc       2.36


where a, b, d, q, and rc are parameters with rc being the interatomic cutoff distance. The
two-body V2 interaction would be zero if rij ≥ rc .

   The two-body V2 potential energy curve for the Cl and C atoms from a stable CH3 Cl
molecule was obtained from ab initio quantum mechanical calculations based on density
functional theory (DFT). The calculations were done using a B3LYP/6-311G basis set
using the software Gaussian [52]. In the calculation, the interatomic distance between C
and Cl were varied from 0.6 to 4.8Å with a 0.05Å step while maintaining the C-H bond
lengths. The C–Cl potential energy per 0.05Å step was obtained by subtracting the total
energies of the C, Cl, and H atoms from the total energy of a CH3 Cl molecule. The final
C–Cl potential energy as function of interatomic distance was obtained by adjusting the
curve to the published minimum bonding energy -3.39eV at 1.77Å interatomic distance
[134]. The potential energy obtained from DFT is fitted with Eq. 4.1 using Levenberg-
Marquardt nonlinear fitting as shown in Fig. 4.2. The parameters obtained from the
fitting are summarized in Table 4.1.

   For purely repulsive interaction, VR in Eq. 4.2 is fitted to the same data points obtained
from DFT calculations as shown in Fig. 4.3. The parameters obtained from the fitting
are summarized in Table 4.2.
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                            71




   Figure 4.2: C–Cl two-body V2 potential energy as a function of the interatomic
   distance. The data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curve is obtained
                      from fitting V2 interaction described by Eq. 4.1.


   In a similar manner, the two-body V2 potential energy curve for the interaction of Cl
and F was also obtained from ab initio DFT calculations using a FCl molecule. The F–Cl
potential energy was obtained by subtracting the total energies of the F and Cl atoms
from the total energy of a FCl molecule. The final F–Cl potential energy as function
of interatomic distance was obtained by adjusting the curve to the published minimum
bonding energy -2.58eV at 1.63Å interatomic distance [134]. The potential energy ob-
tained from DFT is also fitted with Eq. 4.1 using Levenberg-Marquardt nonlinear fitting
as shown in Fig. 4.4. The parameters obtained from the fitting are also summarized in
Table 4.3. The repulsive VR interaction in Eq. 4.2 is also fitted to the same data points
obtained from DFT calculations as shown in Fig. 4.5. The parameters obtained from the
fitting are summarized in Table 4.4.
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                                             72




    Figure 4.3: C–Cl two-body V2 potential energy as a function of the interatomic
    distance. The data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curve is obtained
                       from fitting VR interaction described by Eq. 4.2.

      Table 4.3: Calculated parameter values for the two-body V2 interaction of F–Cl.

                                   Parameters          Values   Units
                                       a               661.35 (eV)2q /Å
                                       b                82.67 (eV)q /Å
                                       q                 1.17
                                       d                3.55     Å
                                       rc               3.22     Å


   The three-body V3 interaction given by


           V3 (i, j, k) = hjik (rij , rik , θjik ) + hijk (rji , rjk , θijk ) + hikj (rki , rkj , θikj ).   (4.4)


describes the angular dependencies of the i th , j th , and k th atoms. The h function expressed
below is dependent on the angle between three atoms θ, and the distances r of the two
atoms from the vertex atom denoted by the center subscript.


                  hijk (rji , rjk , θijk ) = kijk |cos θijk − Θijk |γijk fij (rij )fjk (rjk ).              (4.5)
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                            73




   Figure 4.4: F–Cl two-body V2 potential energy as a function of the interatomic
   distance. The data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curve is obtained
                      from fitting V2 interaction described by Eq. 4.1.

   Table 4.4: Calculated parameter values for the two-body repulsive VR interaction of
                             F–Cl based on FCl molecule.

                                   Parameters Values
                                       a      3013.26
                                       p       1.49
                                       c        5.84
                                       rc       2.02


where k, Θ, and γ are parameters. The f function prevents the overestimation of the
angular dependency, and is dependent on V2 given by
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                         1,      r ≤ rmin ,
                                        
                                        
                            fij (r) =     V2 (r)
                                                 , rmin < r < rc ,                       (4.6)
                                         V2min
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        0,
                                                  r > rc ,


where rmin is the distance between the i th and j th at the minimum two-body interaction
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                            74




    Figure 4.5: F–Cl two-body V2 potential energy as a function of the interatomic. The
    data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curve is obtained from fitting
                             VR interaction described by Eq. 4.2.


energy V2min . Since the k, Θ, and γ are parameters dependent on the configuration
describe by its subscript, the parameters for all possible three-body V3 configurations of
the system with Si, O, N, C, F, and Cl atoms must be calculated. The calculation for the
parameters of the single bonded F–C–Cl three-body V3 interaction is shown as example
in this section.

   The three-body V3 potential energy of F–C–Cl as a function of the angle θ was also ob-
tained from ab initio DFT calculations using a chlorofluoromethane (CH2 ClF) molecule.
In this calculation, the bond lengths of between atoms are maintained. Only the angle
θF CCl between the F, C, and Cl atoms with C as the center atom was varied by 1° incre-
ment without changing the azimuthal angle. The potential energy obtained from DFT
is fitted against Eq. 4.5 as shown in Fig. 4.6. The potential energy data as a function of
the angle θ fitted against Eq. 4.5 for other configurations with Cl are shown in Appendix
C. The parameters k, Θ, and γ for various configuration of Cl with Si, O, N, C, and F
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                           75




   Figure 4.6: F–C–Cl three-body V3 potential energy as a function of the angle θ. The
   data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curve is obtained from fitting
   V3 interaction described by Eq. 4.5. The DFT calculation was done on a chlorofluo-
   romethane (CH2 ClF) molecule wherein the bond lengths of all atoms are maintained.
            Only the angle θ was varied without changing the azimuthal angle.


are summarized in Table 4.5.




4.4     Results and Discussion


4.4.1    Simulation and Experimental Etch Yield Comparison

The interatomic potential model developed in this study were tested by performing MD
simulation of the etching of Si, SiO2 , and SiN by Cl+ ions. The etch yield as a function
of ion energies from the MD simulations were then compared to existing ion beam ex-
perimental studies for Si [135, 136], and etch yields for SiO2 as shown in Fig. 4.7. The
experimental etch yield for SiO2 was obtained from beam experiments done with the
mass-selected ion beam system discussed in Ch. 1. Ion beam experimental studies of
SiN etched by Cl+ ions has not been completed. In this figure, the simulation etch yield
is calculated as the removed Si per injected ion during steady-state etching. The etch
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                          76

   Table 4.5: Calculated parameter values for the three-body V3 interactions for various
                      configurations of Cl with Si, O, N, C, and F.

                      Configuration       k          Θ           γ
                        F–C–Cl        6.339864   -0.344385   2.228620
                        C–C–Cl        6.362699   -0.365817   2.317829
                        Cl–C–Cl       6.795467   -0.388800   2.270487
                        H–C–Cl        3.768094   -0.288685   2.223051
                        N–C–Cl        5.871474   -0.410142   2.184573
                        Si–C–Cl       4.004965   -0.376433   2.153366
                        O–C–Cl        5.326747   -0.307112   2.076946
                        C=C–Cl        6.267638   -0.531098   2.086608
                        O=C–Cl        5.770617   -0.543057   1.961318
                        N=C–Cl        3.784756   -0.529934   2.083379
                        C≡C–Cl        2.157150   -0.944879   1.810899
                        N≡C–Cl        3.611220   -1.000000   1.309323
                        C–Si–Cl       3.608483   -0.319625   2.307230
                        F–Si–Cl       3.373096   -0.314520   2.206953
                        N–Si–Cl       2.428939   -0.407355   1.912306
                        C–O–Cl        3.981111   -0.356296   1.989148
                        F–O–Cl        4.782706   -0.308851   2.149168
                        N–O–Cl        4.275831   -0.412694   2.077401
                        C–N–Cl        4.303012   -0.346871   2.032523
                        F–N–Cl        4.070931   -0.283824   1.994282
                        H–N–Cl        2.515344   -0.244634   1.992099
                        N–N–Cl        5.087651   -0.381209   2.182551
                        O–N–Cl        4.779717   -0.337203   2.075855
                        Si–N–Cl       4.347006   -0.488270   2.323039
                        O=N–Cl        6.829497   -0.435532   2.200072
                        C=N–Cl        1.864396   -1.014258   1.170672


yields of Si and SiO2 showed relatively good agreement with experimental yields. The
simulation etch yields of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions as a function of ion energy were
published in Ref. 117 and discussed in Ch. 3. The relatively good agreement between the
simulation and experiment suggests that the MD simulation could provide good insight
in the etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions.



4.4.2    Etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions

In this section, the effects of adding Cl+ to the etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions
would be discussed.
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                            77




    Figure 4.7: The etch yields of Si, SiO2 , and SiN by Cl+ as a function of ion energy
    obtained from MD simulation. For comparison, the etch yields of Si [135, 136] and SiO2
    by Cl+ ions obtained from ion beam experiments are also shown. Ion beam experiment
                     for SiN etched by Cl+ ions has not been completed.


   Figure 4.8 shows the instantaneous etching yields of (a) SiO2 and (c) SiN by 1,000eV
CF3 + ions and Cl+ for all atomic species of the systems and the corresponding changes in
depth for (b) SiO2 and (d) SiN as functions of the ion dose obtained from MD simulations
during steady-state etching. Since the CF3 + ions and Cl+ ions were injected alternatingly,
the ion dose considered is only for the CF3 + ions. As such, steady-state etching is defined
when the etch yield of Si, O, and N atoms are positive, and when the average removed C,
F, and Cl atoms are 1, 3, and 1 respectively. Steady-state etching was found to begin at
1.0x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . By doing this, the etching simulations can be easily compared
to the etching simulations with only CF3 + ions. Since etch time as defined in experiments
is not a parameter in the simulations, the etch rate is defined as the change in depth as a
function of the ion dose as shown in Fig. 4.8(b) and (d). Since the etch yield is directly
correlated to the etch rate, subsequent discussion would be focused on the etch rate.

   Figure 4.9 shows the etch rate of SiO2 etched by 1,000eV CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions
injected at 0° and 60° incident angles. This was compared with etching simulation of
SiO2 by CF3 + ions only. At 0° incidence, an increase in the etch rate at the beginning
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                               78




    Figure 4.8: Instantaneous etching yields (a) SiO2 and (c) SiN by 1,000eV CF3 +
    ions with Cl+ ions for all atomic species of the systems and the corresponding changes
    in depth for (b) SiO2 and (d) SiN as functions of the ion dose obtained from MD
    simulations. Here, the x-axis denotes only the CF3 + ion dose. The angle of ion incidence
                                  is normal to the film surface.


of etching could be observed. However, it can be readily seen that adding Cl+ ions to
CF3 + ions has minimal change to the etch rate of SiO2 once steady-state etching has been
attained. The expected increase in etch rate was only observed when the incident angle
was changed to 60°.

   The calculation of the etch rate was done for both SiO2 and SiN at all energies. The
etch rates are then plotted as a function of ion energy as shown in Fig. 4.10. The etch
rates of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions are plotted with black and red square
markers for 0° and 60° incident angles. For comparison, the etch rates SiO2 and SiN
etched by CF3 + ions only are also plotted as blue and green circle markers respectively.
It can be seen in this figure that the etch rate of SiO2 is greater than the etch rate of SiN.
This was expected due to the difference in material density even though the etch yield of
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                             79




    Figure 4.9: Change in depth as a function of ion dose of SiO2 etched by 1,000eV
    CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions injected at 0° and 60° incident angles. This was compared
    with etching simulation of SiO2 by CF3 + ions only. Here, the x-axis denotes only the
    CF3 + ion dose. The y-axis denotes the thickness of the etched material with zero as
    the initial material height. The orange and cyan dashed lines are sample fitting lines
    for the slope calculation during steady-state etching. The values denote the calculated
                                slopes representing the etch rate.


SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions only have small differences. However, it was
unexpected that the etch rate for SiO2 would not change at all ion energies. The minimal
change in the etch rate was also observed for SiN except at 500eV CF3 + ions with Cl+
ions. For SiN at 500eV, adding Cl+ ions to the CF3 + ions actually inhibited the etching
as evidenced by the decrease in etch rate. We expected that adding Cl+ ions to CF3 +
ions would result to an increase in etch rate since the etch rate with just Cl+ ions would
be added to the etch rate with just CF3 + ions. However, such effects for both SiO2 and
SiN were only observed when the ions are injected at 60° incident angle. At 60°, adding
Cl+ ions to CF3 + ions resulted to ≈1.6x increase in the etch rate.

   The depth profiles as a function of atomic densities of each species for SiN etched at
500eV ion energy are plotted in Fig. 4.11. The proceeding discussion would focus on the
results for SiN at 500eV since much of the effects of adding Cl+ ions could be observed at
this case. Looking first at Fig. 4.11(c) and (d), the difference of the material surface could
already be seen. Since the ion is injected at an angle for Fig. 4.11(d), the penetration
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                                80




    Figure 4.10: Etch rate as a function of ion energy for (a) SiO2 and (b) SiN etched by
    CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions denoted by square markers, and by CF3 + ions only denoted
    by circle markers. The ions are injected at 0° and 60° incident angles. The lines are just
                                       guides to the eyes.


depth of the ions is shallower compared to Fig. 4.11(c). As such, the mixing layer when
the ions are injected at 60° is thinner and less dense compared to 0°. Here, the mixing
layer is defined as the layer that contains Si, N, C and F atoms. At 60°, the etch rate is
higher even with a thinner modified layer. It is likely that at 60°, physical sputtering is
more dominant.

   Comparing Fig. 4.11(c) to Fig. 4.11(a), the effect of adding Cl+ ions to CF3 + ions
could clearly be seen by the much denser mixing layer in Fig. 4.11(a). The lower etch
rate observed at Fig. 4.10 for SiN etched at 500eV CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions could then
be attributed to a much higher atomic densities for C and F shown in Fig. 4.11(a). It is
well known that in fluorocarbon etching, a surface layer containing FC species is needed
to facilitate the etching [63]. However, when the deposition of the FC species overtakes
the etching of the material, etch stop could occur due to the formation of a thick FC film
that would passivate the surface. In line with this, it is possible that due to the relatively
low energy of 500eV, the Cl+ ions retained by the material blocks the CF3 + from etching
the SiN. Since the CF3 + ions are not being used in etching, deposition of the FC film
would be more favourable. Figure 4.11(b) showed the SiN material with the least atomic
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                                 81




    Figure 4.11: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for SiN etched by 500eV
    CF3 + & Cl+ injected at (a) 0° and (b) 60°, compared to SiN etched by 500eV CF3 + ions
    injected at (c) 0° and (d) 60°. The depth profiles were taken at the same ion dose of
    1.8x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . The origin of the vertical axis is the position of the material’s
    top surface prior to etching. The vertical axes have different ranges but same increment.


densities for C and F. Due to a thinner mixing layer for this case, the ions can readily
sputter the SiN material.

   The depth profiles of atomic densities for both SiO2 and SiN at other energies are
shown in Appendix C. Based on the depth profiles of atomic densities, it can be inferred
that the Cl+ injected at 0° would spend most of its kinetic energy on a thick mixing layer.
With a thick mixing layer, the Cl + ions would just etch the carbon and fluorine on top.
As such, the etch rate of SiO2 at all ion energies, and the etch rate of SiN at >500eV ion
energies had minimal changes with the addition of Cl+ to CF3 + ions. It can be said that
the net effect of the etching by adding Cl+ ions, and the deposition of the FC species to
form the mixing layer is essentially zero.

   To determine the etching mechanism of Cl+ ions when added to CF3 + ions, additional
simulations wherein Cl+ ions were replaced with Ar+ ions were performed. Argon was
chosen due to two reasons: (1) similar mass with chlorine; and (2) inert. With Ar having
a similar mass with the system, a similar physical interaction with the system could be
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                        82

expected. Also, Ar would have a different chemical interaction compared to Cl since Ar is
inert. This would help highlight the chemical effects of adding Cl+ to CF3 + ions. Results
(Appendix C) showed that for both SiO2 and SiN etched by CF3 + ions with Ar+ ions at
0°, minimal change in the etch rates for all ion energies compared to the etching without
Ar+ ions was observed. Also at 60°, addition of Ar+ ions to CF3 + ions exhibited similar
etch rates with the addition of Cl+ ions to CF3 + ions. Since both Ar and Cl showed the
same etch rates except for SiN etched by 500eV ions injected at 0°, it can be inferred that
the mechanism upon which Cl removes the fluorocarbon is through physical sputtering.
To further verify this, the etched products or desorbed species for the etching of SiO2 and
SiN by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions were also studied.



4.4.3    Desorbed Species from the Etching of SiO2 and SiN by

         CF3 + and Cl+

The desorbed species from the MD simulation of the etching of SiO2 by CF3 + ions with
and without addition of Cl+ ions were plotted in Fig. 4.12. There were various desorbed
species but only relevant ones were plotted. It can be observed in Fig. 4.12 that by
injecting the ions at 60° incident angle, the yield of monoatomic species (e.g. Fig. 4.12(a)
Si and Fig. 4.12(b) O) removed through physical sputtering increases. By adding Cl+
ions to CF3 + ions at 60°, this yield would be further increased due to the higher ion flux.
As a consequence, the yield of heavier molecules (e.g. Fig. 4.12(h) SiF3 and Fig. 4.12(i)
SiF4 ) removed through chemical sputtering decreases.

   It can also be observed that the yield of heavier SiFx species (Fig. 4.12(h)–(j)) is
highest for CF3 + ions injected at 0°. This yield would also decrease when Cl+ ions
injected at 0°are added. Additionally, the yield of monoatomic C and F increased when
Cl+ ions were added as shown in Fig. 4.12(f) and (m). The trends observed in the
desorbed species support the inference in the previous section which suggests that Cl+
ions primarily remove the fluorocarbon through physical sputtering. The desorbed species
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+   83




                   (a)                                     (b)




                   (c)                                     (d)




                   (e)                                     (f)




                   (g)                                     (h)
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                           84




                     (i)                                            (j)




                     (k)                                            (l)




                    (m)                                             (n)

   Figure 4.12: The yield of the desorbed species as a function of ion energy for SiO2
   etched by CF3 + ions with and without addition of Cl+ ions. The yield is calculated as
   the number of specified desorbed species over the total number of injected CF3 + ions.



from the MD simulation of the etching of SiN by CF3 + ions with and without addition
of Cl+ ions were plotted in Appendix C. The trends observed in the desorbed species for
SiN are similar to that of SiO2 . The main difference was only observed for SiN etched by
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                        85

500eV CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions injected at 0° wherein a much higher yield of CF molecule
was observed. As such, further discussion would not be necessary.

   Implications of the results of the MD simulations of the etching of oxide and nitride
by CF3 + ions with and without addition of Cl+ ions is on the effects in the etching of a
tapered structure. In a tapered HAR channel, the ion flux reaching the bottom of the
channel would come at normal incidence. In contrast, the ions would hit the channel
sidewalls at an angle. Based on the results of the MD simulation, the etch rate at the
bottom of the trench would be the same but the etch rate of the tapered sidewall could be
faster. This could lead to smoothing of the tapered sidewall, and form a straight channel
profile as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4.13.




    Figure 4.13: Schematic diagram of a possible mechanism of the smoothing of tapered
                              HAR channels in 3D NAND.




4.5     Conclusion

In this study, MD simulations of etching of SiO2 , and SiN by energetic CF3 + ions with
and without Cl+ ions injected at 0° and 60° were performed. To perform MD simula-
tion combining chlorine with fluorocarbon, interatomic potential that would model the
Chapter 4. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+                         86

interaction of chlorine with carbon and fluorine has been developed. To validate the in-
teratomic potential model developed, MD simulation of the etching of Si, SiO2 , and SiN
by Cl+ were performed. Good agreement between the etch yield results from the MD
simulations and ion beam experiments were obtained.

   In the MD simulation of the etching of SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions and Cl+ ions,
it was determined that adding Cl+ ions at 0° had minimal effect on the etch rate of
both SiO2 and SiN. This was true at all ion energies for SiO2 but not for SiN. Adding
500eV Cl+ ions at 0° to the etching of SiN resulted to the decrease in etch rate. It was
determined that the etch rate decreased due to the deposited FC film that passivated the
SiN material. The minimal and even negative effect of adding Cl+ ions at 0° to CF3 +
ions was attributed to the possibility that much of the energy of the Cl+ ions is spent on
etching the carbon and fluorine atoms from the thick mixing layer formed during etching
at 0°. In contrast, an increase in etch rate was observed when the added Cl+ ions were
injected at 60° since the resulting mixing layer would be thinner. By replacing Cl+ with
Ar+ , it was determined that Cl+ ions remove that carbon and fluorine primarily through
physical sputtering. This finding was supported by an apparent increase in the yield of
monoatomic C and F desorbed species when Cl+ ions were added. Implication of the
results is on the etching of tapered HAR channels in 3D NAND. Due to the difference in
the etch rates observed when the Cl+ ions are injected at 0° and 60°, a tapered structure
could be smoothed into a straight profile by controlling the direction of the ion flux.
Chapter 5


Molecular Dynamics Study of SiO2
Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon
Plasmas


5.1     Introduction

Computer-mediated communication and high-speed information processing have become
necessities in our modern society. Such technologies require the capacity to store a large
volume of data. Due to its cost efficiency, NAND (i.e., an abbreviation of "Not And")
memory devices have been at the forefront in addressing the need for large data storage.
Therefore, three-dimensional (3D) NAND devices, which are the latest rendition of NAND
memory devices, have been the focal point of much research in the industry [5, 6].

   In the fabrication of 3D NAND memory devices, an alternating stack of films (e.g.
silicon dioxide (SiO2 ) and silicon nitride (SiN)) are deposited on a silicon wafer. To form
the memory cells, hole channels must be etched through all the deposited films. Memory
cells are formed around each hole channel at the locations of specific film layers (e.g., SiN
layers) and the surrounding SiO2 layers serve as insulating layers. Increasing the number
                                             87
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                        88

of memory cells formed around each hole channel requires an increase in the number of
stacked film layers, which in turn requires the formation of deeper hole channels. For a
hole channel, its aspect ratio (AR) is defined as the ratio of its depth to the diameter of its
circular cross-section. Because the memory capacity of the 3D NAND device is dependent
on the numbers of deposited film layers and hole channels, the manufacturing of large-
capacity 3D NAND memory devices requires etching processes to form high-aspect-ratio
(HAR) hole channels.

   An etching process to form HAR structures is referred to as HAR etching [5, 6, 24].
The typical ion incident energy of HAR etching for NAND device manufacturing is said to
be several keV, possibly up to over 10 keV, although there has been little open discussion
on the actual ion energies used in the industry. HAR etching is challenging because of
the difficulty in maintaining the circular cross sections and straight-depth profiles of the
holes’ inner surfaces, upon which memory cells are built [14, 17, 24, 82, 83, 137, 138].
Problems encountered in HAR hole etching include incomplete etch or etch stop with
tapered etched hole profiles, which may be caused by the depletion of energetic ions
reaching the bottom and/or redeposition of sputtered/desorbed atoms. Twisted etched
profiles are also encountered, which may be caused by the deflection of the incoming
ions caused by the electric field arising from the electrical charges accumulated on the
holes’ inner surfaces or collisions of ions with the sidewalls at grazing angles. Clogging
and depletion of the hard mask are also encountered in HAR etching [24, 137]. Extensive
experimental studies have been performed to investigate how the shape of the mask affects
the resulting hole profile [35, 36, 139]. Numerical studies have also been performed to
investigate various factors (e.g. neutral-ion flux ratio, the presence of specific radical
species) that affect the profiles of HAR hole channels [104, 117, 137, 140].

   Reactive ion etching (RIE), i.e., etching by energetic ion impact combined with sur-
face chemical reactions [20, 80, 84], is widely used in semiconductor device fabrication
processes, including HAR hole etching for 3D NAND devices. Energetic ions used for
RIE are typically generated in chemically reactive plasmas [27, 28, 76–79]. In general,
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                    89

fluorocarbon (FC)-based plasmas are used to etch SiO2 and SiN etching [32, 118–121].
It has been known that a surface layer containing FC species (which we call a “mixing
layer”) is formed on the material surface during such etching processes and can facilitate
etching reactions by forming silicon fluorides (SiFx ) and other volatile molecular species
[63].

    The interactions of gaseous species such as incident ions and sputtered/desorbed
species with the inner surfaces of an etched HAR hole channel strongly influence the
etched profiles of the hole. In this study, motivated to understand such interactions
holistically, we simulate the etching process of a small hole into a SiO2 film by FC-
based plasmas under idealized conditions, using molecular dynamics (MD) simulation
[43, 94, 95]. A typical HAR hole channel of 3D NAND memory devices has a diameter
of several dozen nanometers and a depth of a few microns. However, in this study, we
study an etching process to form far smaller – atomic-scale – holes. This is because we
are also partly motivated to understand the processing of atomic-scale structures used in
advanced semiconductor devices [80, 84, 116]. Although the etching processes to form
nanometer-scale holes can be quantitatively far different from those to form far-larger-
scale HAR holes for 3D NAND memory devices, some aspects of the surface processes
such as simultaneous etching and redeposition of sputtered/desorbed species on the side
walls may be common, given the fact the mean-free paths of gaseous species are far larger
than the typical dimensions of such holes.

    The rest of this chapter is organized in the following manner. First, we shall discuss
the effects of two types of carbon masks – diamond and amorphous carbon (a−C) – on
the etched profiles of SiO2 by performing MD simulations for nanohole etching with those
masks by FC ion beams. Second, with a hypothetical ideal mask, the etching mechanisms
for the formation of nanoscale holes into SiO2 by FC ion beams will be further examined.
Third, to understand plasma etching, rather than ion beam etching, we shall examine the
synergistic etching effects of simultaneous irradiation of energetic FC ions and thermal
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                         90

FC radicals, by performing MD simulations of etching of a flat surface, rather than a
deep hole. The conclusions will be presented in the final section.




5.2     MD Simulation

The interatomic potentials used in MD simulations of this study are based on Stillinger-
Weber potentials [48, 49, 108] modified for Si-O-C-F systems [45, 53, 129]. The modified
potentials have been used in earlier simulation studies in Refs. 60, 62–65, 71, 74, 114,
116, 117, 129. The van der Waals (vdW) forces [53] are also included in this study.
The interatomic potential functions used in this study are briefly summarized in the
supplementary material.

   In this study, the model material to be etched by energetic ions is SiO2 . The SiO2
model material was created by initially placing Si and O atoms in the ideal β-cristobalite
structure with a lattice constant of 6.978 Å (which is close to the ideal β-cristobalite lattice
constant of 7.138 Å) and thermalizing the system at 300 K, as explained in Ref. 74. The
initial thickness of the model SiO2 material is, e.g., 3.5 nm or selected to be sufficiently
large, depending on the ion incident energy.

   Three sets of simulations are performed in this study. In the first set of simulations,
the SiO2 model material is covered with a carbon mask. The lateral dimensions of the
model material covered with a carbon mask are 5.58 nm × 5.58 nm. Periodic boundary
conditions are applied in the lateral directions. Two types of carbon masks are considered;
(a) diamond and (b) a−C, as shown in Fig. 5.1. Each carbon mask has a hole with a
diameter of 4nm in its center. The use of a diamond mask is unrealistic for typical
semiconductor processes but we examine it to understand the effects of the hardest carbon
mask that we can create self-consistently in our simulation. In this set of simulations,
both SiO2 and carbon masks are etched by the same incident ion flux simultaneously, as
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                         91




    Figure 5.1: Schematic diagrams of SiO2 films with (a) diamond and (b) a−C hard
    masks. The initial thickness of the SiO2 films is 3.5 nm and the thickness of carbon
    masks is (a) 3.7 nm and (b) 5.1 nm. Each carbon mask has a hole with a diameter
    of 4 nm in its center. As the etching process proceeds in simulation, the thickness of
    the SiO2 increases with more SiO2 being added from the bottom, and therefore the
    model material represents an infinitely deep SiO2 film covered with a carbon mask.
    With periodic boundary conditions imposed in the horizontal directions, the model also
                             represents an infinitely wide surface.


in the real system. The diamond carbon mask has a unit cell of 3.57 Å. Figure 5.1 and
all succeeding figures that visualize the model material are rendered with OVITO [141].

   In the second set of simulations, the same SiO2 model material covered with the
diamond mask is used but we assume that the mask cannot be etched at all by the
incident ions. In the third set of simulations, the SiO2 model material without any
mask is etched. Its lateral dimensions are 4.19 nm × 4.19 nm. With periodic boundary
conditions imposed in the lateral directions, it represents an infinitely wide flat surface.

   The model material is placed in the simulation box to which periodic boundary condi-
tions are applied in the horizontal (i.e., x and y) directions. The bottom monolayer of the
initial model material is fixed in position to prevent vertical drift of the model material
during the simulation box due to the momentum transfer from injected ions. The film
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                        92

is maintained to be thick enough during the simulation. If needed, more SiO2 is added
to the model film from the bottom, as explained below. Initially the model material was
thermalized at 300K.

   As in the earlier studies (e.g., Refs. 116 and 117), we perform etching simulations by
injecting ions cyclically. In each ion injection cycle, an ion is injected into the surface
of the model material at normal incidence with a predetermined kinetic energy. The
lateral (i.e., x-y) position of impact is selected randomly across the material surface. In
this study, incident ions are CF3 + as representative ions emitted from FC plasmas. The
ion is injected from a position slightly above the material surface to minimize the ion
transit time in vacuum. The ion kinetic energy examined in this study is in the range
of 200eV to 2,000eV. The injected ions in the simulation are treated as fast neutrals.
This approximation is based on the assumption that the injected ions are neutralized by
Auger emission upon interaction with a surface [73, 74]. After ion injection, the system
(i.e., surface material and injected ions) is left to evolve under constant total energy (i.e.,
microcanonical) conditions for 700fs. The kinetic energy transfer of the injected ion to
the material and the subsequent collision cascade can occur in this period. In addition,
during this time period, the majority of sputtered atoms and reflected ions from the inner
surface of the etched hole typically have sufficient time to travel across the hole diameter.

   At the end of this microcanonical simulation period, atoms not covalently bonded to
the material surface (i.e. atoms floating above the material top surface or in the etched
hole channel) are removed from the system as volatile etch products. It should be noted
that, in this removal process, atoms that are weakly bonded to the material surface by
the vdW forces are not removed.

   Although fast-moving sputtered or reflected species from the sidewall can reach other
areas of the sidewall and be redeposited there, some desorbed species that travel slowly
in the open space of the etched hole may be removed from the system prematurely.
Therefore, in our simulation, we may underestimate the redeposited materials.
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                   93

   After the microcanonical simulation period, the system is then artificially cooled by
gradually decreasing the velocities of all remaining atoms with a Langevin [57] thermostat
for 1,200fs. After this Langevin cooling step, the temperature of the model material is
then brought to 300K with a Berendsen [58] thermostat for 100fs. Thus, the duration of
a single injection cycle is 2,000fs. Atoms that are not covalently bonded to the surface
at the end of the cooling step are also removed from the system and counted as etch
products. The system at the end of the injection cycle is then used as the material to be
etched for the next injection cycle.

   Atoms that are weakly bonded to the surface by the vdW forces may thermally desorb
over timescales much longer than the ion injection cycle used in our simulation. However,
in our simulation, we never observed a large number of weakly bonded atoms built up
on the surface, which indicates most weakly bonded atoms desorbed eventually in later
ion injection cycles as etch products. Therefore, we believe that the fact that we do not
remove weakly bonded atoms from the system in the atom removal processes discussed
above would not much affect the simulation results.

   During an ion injection cycle, if the volume-averaged temperature of the system ex-
ceeds a predefined temperature (1,700K in this study), or the injected ion or recoiled
atoms reach the bottom layer of the model material, the simulation of this ion injection
cycle is discarded and a sufficiently thick SiO2 slab is added from the bottom of the
model material. After this thicker model material is thermalized at 300K, the next injec-
tion cycle starts. This injection cycle is repeated until the ion dose reaches the desired
value.

   In the third set of simulations, where the SiO2 model material is etched without a
mask, etching yields of SiO2 by simultaneous incidence of CF+
                                                            3 ions and CF3 radicals

are examined. For this purpose, we repeat the radical irradiation cycle and ion injection
cycle alternatingly, as schematically depicted in Fig. 5.2. The ion energy is set at 2,000
eV. The radical injection cycle is essentially the same as the ion injection cycle, except
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                      94




    Figure 5.2: Alternating CF3 radical irradiation and CF3 + ion injection to simulate
              simultaneous radical and ion irradiation of a SiO2 flat surface.


that multiple radicals (25 or 50 radicals at a time) are sent to the surface at random
lateral positions with an incident kinetic energy of each radical species being 0.5eV. The
incident angle of each radical species is set to be normal to the surface for the sake of
simplicity. As in the ion injection cycle, the radical injection cycle also has the same
cooling processes by Langevin and Berendsen thermostats.

   In reality, radicals are typically in thermal equilibrium with the background gas, so
each radical species should have an average kinetic energy of 0.026 eV for 300 K gas
temperature and its incident angle should be distributed uniformly. In the simulation,
we use a slightly higher incident energy of 0.5 eV with normal incidence because it can
reduce the traveling time of CF3 radicals in vacuum before reaching the surface. We
have observed that the use of 0.5 eV, rather than 0.026 eV, hardly increase the surface
temperature or affect the nature of radical deposition on the surface. This is likely because
a kinetic energy of 0.5 eV is far below a typical covalent bond energy of a few eV. More
discussion on FC deposition by radical irradiation is given in the supplementary material
(Appendix D).
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                    95

5.3     Results and Discussion


5.3.1    Etched Hole Profiles of SiO2 with Carbon Masks by CF3 +

         Ion beams

First, we examine ion beam etching of SiO2 with carbon masks. In the simulations, CF3 +
ions are injected at normal incidence across the top surface with fixed kinetic energy. The
resulting hole profile cross-sections of the carbon mask/SiO2 model material are shown
in Fig. 5.3, where the side view of all atoms in a thin vertical layer with a thickness of
0.558nm that passes through the central axis of the model material (Fig. 5.1) is depicted
after etching. The etched profiles with the diamond masks are given in Fig. 5.3(a) and
those with the a−C masks are in Fig. 5.3(b). The corresponding top-down perspectives of
the carbon masks are also shown in Fig. 5.4. Here, the depth of the top-down perspectives
is only down to the interface between the carbon masks and the SiO2 film, so no SiO2
film is seen in this figure. For both Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4, the ion dose for the 200, 300,
and 500eV cases is 6.42 × 1015 cm−2 (2,000 injections) and that for the 1,000 eV case is
3.21 × 1015 cm−2 (1,000 injections).

   In both mask types, the shallowest hole channels are observed at 200eV while the
deepest hole channels are observed at 500eV. At 1,000eV, we stopped the simulations
after 1,000 ion injections (an ion dose of 3.21 × 1015 cm−2 ) for both mask types because
the mask collapsed completely by then. At 200eV, the rate of FC deposition was faster
than the rate of SiO2 removal. Initially, SiO2 was etched by the incident ion beam,
resulting in the formation of shallow hole channels. However, further ion injections at
this energy caused FC film deposition. A similar observation was made in the case of
300eV ion incidence. However, the rate of FC deposition was slower than that at 200eV.
At 500eV, deeper etched channels were observed. The channel formed with the diamond
mask was much deeper than that with the a−C mask. This was due to the faster etching
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                         96




   Figure 5.3: Centered cross-section slabs of SiO2 films with the (a) 3.7nm-thick dia-
   mond mask and (b) 5.1nm-thick a−C mask after CF3 + ion incidence with kinetic energy
   ranging from 200eV to 1,000 eV at normal incidence. The ion dose for the 200, 300,
   and 500eV cases is 6.42 × 1015 cm−2 (2,000 injections) and that for the 1,000 eV case
   is 3.21 × 1015 cm−2 (1,000 injections). The cross-section slab depicted here is a thin
   vertical layer with a thickness of 0.558nm that passes through the central axis of each
      model material given Fig. 5.1. The lateral width of each cross section is 5.58nm.
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                            97

and deformation of the a−C mask hole pattern, as shown in both Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4,
which resulted in a smaller SiO2 surface area exposed to incident ions.




    Figure 5.4: Top-down perspectives of the SiO2 films with (a) diamond and (b) a−C
    masks after CF3 + ion incidence with kinetic energy ranging from 200eV to 1,000 eV at
    normal incidence. The ion dose for the 200, 300, and 500eV cases is 6.42 × 1015 cm−2
    (2,000 injections) and that for the 1,000 eV case is 3.21 × 1015 cm−2 (1,000 injections).
    The top-down perspective depicted here is only down to the interface between the mask
            and the SiO2 film. Atoms below the interface (i.e., SiO2 ) are not shown.


   The radial profiles of atomic densities of the SiO2 film with carbon masks etched by
500eV CF3 + are shown in Fig. 5.5. The corresponding cross-section slabs of the radial
profiles are also shown in Fig. 5.5. Here, the four horizontal dashed lines (the locations of
which are 1 nm, 2 nm, 3 nm, and 4 nm below the mask- SiO2 interface) indicate the regions
where the atomic densities are calculated. Each atomic number density is calculated from
a running average of the number of the corresponding atoms in a cylindrical shell volume
with a radial width of 0.025 nm and a depth of 1 nm (between the two horizontal dashed
lines) around the central axis of the hole and plotted as a function of the radius. We
can estimate the diameter of the hole channel from the atomic density profiles. For
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                            98




   Figure 5.5: The radial profiles of the atomic densities of SiO2 films with (a) diamond
   and (b) a − C masks etched by CF3 + ions. The incident energy of CF3 + ions is 500eV
   and the ion dose was 6.42 × 1015 cm−2 (2,000 injections). The cross-section slabs of
   the SiO2 films with carbon masks from Fig. 5.3 are also depicted here. The horizontal
   dashed lines indicate the regions where the the radial profiles are calculated. The radial
          distance is measured from the central axis of the initial model material.
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                       99

example, if we define the radius of the etched hole channel as that at which both atomic
densities of Si and O exceed 1.0 × 1021 atoms/cm3 , for the region over the depth from 1
nm to 2 nm below the mask–SiO2 interface [ i.e., the top profiles of Fig. 5.5(a) and (b)],
the diameters of the etched hole channels there with a diamond and amorphous carbon
masks are approximately 1.8 nm and 2.0 nm. These diameters more or less correspond to
those of the hole channels seen in the cross sections. The estimated diameters are much
smaller than the initial hole diameter of 4nm. This is because the mask was compressed or
deformed by the ion injections and the opening diameter became smaller, as also depicted
in Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4.

   When a clean SiO2 film is exposed to energetic ion incidence, oxygen (O) atoms are
preferentially sputtered than silicon (Si) atoms [63, 117]. This is also observed in Fig. 5.5,
where the ratio of the O to Si densities is close to unity near the sidewall surface, much
smaller than the stoichiometric ratio of 2 for SiO2 . O atoms are depleted on the sidewalls
of the etched SiO2 holes, which indicates the preferential sputtering of O atoms during
the etching process.

   The carbon (C) and fluorine (F) atomic densities are also seen to be higher for etching
with the a − C mask than that with the diamond mask. This may be caused by the more
prominent deformation of the a−C mask, as shown in Figs. 5.3 and 5.4; larger protrusions
of the mask collide with incident energetic ions and retard them, making the incident ions
less energetic and more prone to deposition. Sputtered C atoms from the mask can be
also brought to the etched hole surface.

   It is also seen that highly tapered hole channels were formed at 500eV with both mask
types. The tapering may be caused by the masking effect since the opening of the hole
became smaller as the etching progressed. The tapering could also be attributed to the
re-deposition of sputtered/desorbed species on the sidewalls of the etched hole channel.

   At 1,000eV, both masks had collapsed by the time the ion dose reached 3.21×1015 cm−2
(or 1,000 injections). Because the a−C mask is structurally weaker than the diamond
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                   100

mask, the a−C mask was depleted much faster than the diamond mask and, consequently,
the etched depth of SiO2 before the mask collapse was much smaller with the a−C mask
than the diamond mask.



5.3.2    SiO2 Nanohole Etching with an Ideal Mask

Based on what we have observed so far, it seems that the deformation of a mask is
unavoidable in the actual beam etching processes even if the incident ion energy is suf-
ficiently low. To mitigate this effect, we may need a much thicker mask possibly with
an opening wider than the diameter of the desired etched hole. In this subsection, how-
ever, to understand the beam-surface interactions in SiO2 hole etching better, we consider
etching processes with a hypothetical (i.e., ideal) mask that never deforms. To achieve
this in MD simulation, we inject ions only through the circular opening of the diamond
mask shown in Fig. 5.3. Some ions that enter the edge of the opening may hit some
protruding atoms on the sidewall of the mask due to the natural surface roughness, but
most incident ions directly reach the SiO2 surface inside the opening.

   Figure 5.6 shows the cross-section profiles of SiO2 with the ideal masks etched by
CF3 + ion beams with kinetic energy ranging from 200eV to 2,000 eV at normal incidence.
The ion dose is 1.19 × 1016 cm−2 (1,500 injections).

   It is seen in Fig. 5.6 that, unlike the profiles shown in Fig. 5.3, the opening of the
carbon mask essentially remained to be 4 nm in diameter, as intended, because the region
of ion incidence was confined to the original mask opening. The carbon mask sidewalls
were etched only slightly, if any, by grazing energetic ions. However, in all cases where
the hole etching proceeded, the etched hole profiles were highly tapered. Therefore, the
tapering is not necessarily caused by the deformation of the mask; it can be caused by
the intrinsic tapering (i.e., appearance of a sloped surface that has a high etching yield)
[142] as well as the redeposition of sputtered/desorbed species. Some etched holes were
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                        101




   Figure 5.6: Centered cross-section slabs of SiO2 with the ideal masks (as explained
   in the main text) after CF3 + ion injections with kinetic energy ranging from 200eV to
     2,000 eV at normal incidence. The ion dose is 1.19 × 1016 cm−2 (1,500 injections).
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                           102




    Figure 5.7: Depths of the etched hole channels as functions of the ion dose. The
    etching conditions are the same as those of Fig. 5.6. Zero denotes the initial height of
                          the SiO2 . The lines are guides to the eyes.


somewhat twisted, which may have been caused by stochastically roughened sidewalls
that deflect the impinging ions, i.e., stochastic scattering of ions.

   For the hole profile at 500eV or higher energy, it is seen that fewer C and F atoms
remained on the sidewall near the bottom than in the area near the mask. Therefore,
the etching at the bottom must be mostly due to physical sputtering than chemical
etching. As the depth increases, desorbed species in the hole channel have more difficulty
in escaping upwards and may get re-adsorbed on the sidewall. Redeposited materials on
the sidewall may be scraped off by the incident ions and brought back to a deeper region.
In this way, at a sufficiently high AR, etched materials can hardly find a way out of the
hole unless they form stable volatile species such as CO and SiF4 .

   Figure 5.7 shows the dependence of the etched depth on the ion dose. It is seen that,
at 200eV, the depth gradually increased as the ion dose increased, which indicates that
the deposition rate of an FC layer overtook the etching yield. At 300eV, the depth of the
channel remained constant at higher ion doses, i.e., an etch stop occurred. At higher ion
energies, the etched depth increased linearly with the ion dose. In all cases here, the AR
is less than 10, which may be too small to exhibit an AR-dependent etching yield.
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                          103




   Figure 5.8: Nominal etching yields of (a) Si and (b) O atoms (both denoted by filled
   circles) during the hole etching by 2,000eV CF3 + ions of Fig. ??. The "nominal etching
   yield" is defined in the main text. The number above each filled square in (b) indicates
   approximately how many times the nominal etching yield of O atoms is larger than
   that of Si atoms under the same etching conditions.For comparison, the etching yields
   of Si atoms for a flat SiO2 surface by CF3 + ion beams obtained from MD simulations
   [denoted by filled squares] [117] and ion beam experiments [denoted by filled diamonds]
   [119] are also shown in (a). Similarly, in (b), the etching yield of O atoms for a flat
   SiO2 surface obtained from MD simulations [117] are denoted by filled squares. The
                   lines/curves connecting data points are guides to the eye.
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                       104

   Figure 5.8 shows the nominal etching yields of Si [filled circles in (a)] and O [filled
circles in (b)] during the hole etching of Fig. 5.6 at 2,000eV. Here the nominal etching
yield is defined as the total (i.e., accumulated) number of Si atoms removed from the SiO2
surface over an ion dose of 1.19 × 1016 cm−2 (i.e., 1,500 injections) divided by the ion
dose. It should be noted that the removed Si or O atoms counted in Fig. 5.8(a) are not
necessarily single Si or O atoms but can be in the form of Si or O-containing molecules
or moieties such as SiF2 or CO.

   For comparison, the etching yields of Si or O atoms for flat SiO2 surfaces obtained
from MD simulations [117] and experiments [119] are also shown in Fig. 5.8. The etching
yields of a flat surface, i.e., the number of Si or O-containing species removed from the
surface per ion injection, are those in steady state, i.e., after a sufficiently large ion dose
where the surface chemical compositions no longer change as the etching proceeds. In
steady state, therefore, the etching yield of O atoms from the same SiO2 is twice the
etching yield of Si atoms.

   It is seen in Fig. 5.8 (a) that the nominal etching yield of Si for the hole etching is
much smaller than that for a flat SiO2 surface. This is because, in the hole etching, many
sputtered/desorbed species are redeposited on the sidewall of the hole. In addition, as
seen in Fig. 5.6, as the etched depth increases, more incident ions hit the tapered sidewall,
rather than the flat surface. The etching yield of a sloped surface (i.e., at oblique ion
incidence) is different from that at normal incidence.

   It is also seen that, at 200 eV ion incident energy, the ratio of the nominal etching
yield of O to that of Si is approximately 2, which is the same as the stoichiometric ratio
of SiO2 . However, at 300 eV or higher, the nominal etching yield of O is much larger
than twice the nominal etching yield of Si, which indicates that preferential removal of
O atoms took place [63, 117]. Additionally, the nominal Si etching yields are nearly the
same from 300 eV to 1,000 eV even though, with the same ion dose, the etched depths
increased much in this energy range, as shown in Fig. 5.6. The increase of the etched
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                           105




    Figure 5.9: The percentages of desorbed species during SiO2 etching by CF3 + ions for
    each ion incident energy. The desorbed species are listed in the horizontal axis wherein
    SiFx denotes SiF, SiF2 , SiF3 , and SiF4 ; COx denotes CO, CO2 , and CO3 ; and "Others"
                   primarily contains long carbon chains and Cx Fx species.


depth, therefore, is largely attributed to the volume loss caused by removed oxygen, as
seen in Fig. 5.5.

   Figure 5.9 shows the percentages of specific desorbed or reflected species among all
desorbed/reflected species accumulated during the hole etching processes of Fig. 5.6. It is
seen that, at low ion incident energies of 200eV and 300eV, the majority of O-containing
desorbed species are COx whereas, as the ion incident energy increases, the percentage
of single O atoms increases. The high amount of F and C atoms removed at 200 eV
is attributed to deposited FC layer. Since an FC layer has formed on the surface, the
injected ions are just etching the FC film. At high ion energies, the etching becomes more
physical, causing a high percentage of monoatomic O atoms to be removed.



5.3.3     SiO2 Etching by Simultaneous FC Radical and Ion Irradi-

          ation

Figure 5.6 shows that, if the ion incident energy is sufficiently high, the accumulation
of FC hardly occurs at the bottom of the etched deep hole by CF3 + ion beam etching,
and therefore, the nature of etching is essentially physical sputtering and strong tapering
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                           106




    Figure 5.10: Etching yield of Si for a flat SiO2 surface as a function of the radical-
    to-ion flux ratio. The incident ions are CF3 + at 2,000 eV and the angle of incidence is
    normal to the surface. Radical species are CF3 . At 200 and 300 radical-to-ion ratios,
    after the initial etching of the SiO2 surface, the etching stopped and deposition of an
    FC layer occurred. The solid lines connecting the data points are the guide to the eye.


occurs. Even in FC plasma etching, where FC radicals are abundant, FC radicals hardly
reach the bottom of a deep hole because radicals travel isotropically in the gas phase and
tend to stick near the mask opening when they approach the hole channel. However, part
of the deposited FC layer may be scraped off and pushed down to a deeper region by
incident ions. With such additional FC species, the etching of the bottom surface may
become more chemical in nature and the etching yield may increase.

   In this section, we examine the etching yield enhancement by the presence of FC
radicals. More specifically, we evaluate the etching yield of a flat SiO2 surface by CF3 +
ion injections at normal incidence in the presence of a CF3 radical flux by MD simulation.

   Unlike the nominal etching yields evaluated for Fig. 5.8, the etching yields evaluated
here are those in steady state, i.e., after sufficient radical and ion doses. Therefore, the
etching yield of O is twice the etching yield of Si, as the etching yield for flat surfaces
[117] plotted in Fig. 5.8.

   The result of the simulation was plotted in Fig. 5.10. The radical-to-ion flux ratio
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                   107

was varied from 0:1, 25:1, 50:1, 100:1, 200:1, to 300:1. It is seen that the etching yield
increased almost twice in the presence of CF3 radicals at 25:1 from the etching yield
by the corresponding CF3 + ion beam only. The etching yield is also nearly the same
at 50:1 and 25:1. This was followed by a decrease in etching yield at 100:1. While the
presence of a larger number of F and C atoms promotes the formation of volatile silicon
fluorides and carbon oxides during ion injection, an excessive accumulation of FC at a
larger radical-to-ion ratio retards the surface etching.

   It is likely that, in the presence of an optimal amount of CF3 radicals, the etching
becomes more chemical in nature. Although the authors have not confirmed yet, under
such conditions, the etching may become more isotropic and could contribute to the
lateral etching at the bottom of an etched hole profile, alleviating the tapered etched
profile. MD simulation of hole etching by simultaneous FC radical and ion irradiation
(i.e., under conditions similar to plasma etching, rather than a beam etching) is beyond
the scope of the present study and deferred to future work.




5.4     Conclusions

In this study, MD simulations were performed to simulate etching processes to form
nanoholes in SiO2 by CF3 + ion beams. The ions are injected at normal incidence. When
relatively thin carbon masks (i.e., 3.7nm-thick diamond and 5.1nm-thick a−C masks)
were used, it is found the masks were notably deformed or even collapsed for incident
ions whose kinetic energy was 300eV or higher. Although the use of diamond as a mask
is unrealistic for actual processes, the simulation results show that a denser mask is less
prone to deformation. Because the periodic boundary conditions were imposed in the
horizontal directions over a 5.58nm x 5.58nm square mask model with a 4nm-diameter
hole in its center, the shortest distance between the two mask holes was only 1.58 nm.
The fact that some mask walls were so thin might have also contributed to the observed
deformation or collapse of the mask.
Chapter 5. MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas                 108

   Even with a hypothetical ideal mask that would not deform, it was found that tapered
etched holes were formed by CF3 + ion beams at sufficiently high ion incident energy. It
indicates that tapered etched holes can be formed without the mask deformation. The
hole etching with such high ion incident energy is mostly due to physical sputtering.
Therefore, the tapered etched holes were likely to be caused by intrinsic tapering [142]
(i.e., the appearance of sloped surfaces having high etching yields) and redeposition of
sputtered Si-containing species on sidewalls. Furthermore, the preferential removal of
oxygen from the sidewalls caused the formation of Si-rich sidewall surfaces.

   To form a less tapered, more straight hole, beam etching is thus not sufficient. One
needs more lateral etching, which could mitigate the formation of a tapered sidewalls.
Although highly reactive charge-neutral radicals are unlikely to reach the bottom of a
HAR-etched hole, reactive species deposited near the mask opening may be scraped off
by grazing energetic ions and transported to the bottom. Considering such possibilities,
we also examined synergetic effects of simultaneous incidence of radicals on ion beam
etching of a flat SiO2 surface by MD simulations. It is found that, with an appropriate
flux of CF3 radicals, the etching yield of a flat SiO2 surface by CF3 + ion injection can
double, but excessive exposure to CF3 radicals causes etch stop. MD simulation of hole
etching by simultaneous radical and ion irradiation is beyond the scope of the current
study and deferred to future work.
Chapter 6


General Conclusion

In this research, classical MD simulations supported by ion beam experiments has been
done to provide insights in HAR etching in the fabrication process of 3D NAND flash
memory devices.

   In Chapter 2, MD simulations for the scattering of Ne+ , Ar+ , and Xe+ ions with ion
energy of 1,000eV injected at grazing-angle (≤ 20°) ion incidence on smooth and rough
Si and SiO2 surfaces were performed. This was done to understand the effect of atomic-
scale roughness on the scattering properties of energetic ions at the sidewall of HAR
channels. The results showed that surface roughness broadens the reflection-angle and the
azimuthal-angle distribution. Though regardless of the surface morphology, the reflection-
angle distribution showed that the majority of the ions were reflected specularly while the
azimuthal-angle distribution showed minimal deflection when θi ≤ 10°. Additionally, the
surface roughness reduced the mean kinetic energy of the ions upon scattering. From the
scattering simulations in this chapter, it was found out that the reflection probabilities
were near unity when θi = 5°. Additionally, it was observed that for a crystalline surface,
ions with low ion energy (i.e. 100eV) could channel through the crystal structure, and
reduce the reflection probability. The reflection probabilities obtained from the MD
simulation were also compared to SRIM simulation. From the comparison, it was observed


                                           109
Chapter 6. General Conclusion                                                            110

that SRIM simulations underestimate the reflection probabilities in comparison to MD
simulations, especially at lower ion energy. The difference was attributed to the fact that
SRIM is a binary collision model. Unlike in MD simulations, the ions in SRIM simulations
only interact with one atom from the material surface. As such, it was determined that
MD has higher accuracy than SRIM.

   In Chapter 3, MD simulations of SiO2 , SiN, and ON bilayer model etched by CF3 +
ions injected at normal incidence were performed. Etching yields of SiO2 and SiN ob-
tained from MD simulations were compared to experimental etching yields wherein good
agreement was attained. In the etching of ON bilayer by low energy ions, the thickness of
the mixing layer was less than the initial thickness of the oxide layer. As such, the etch
rates of oxide and nitride layers could be observed separately. At high ion energies, a
mixing layer thicker than the initial thickness of the oxide film would be formed. As such,
a single etch rate was observed. From the MD simulations, it was inferred that in the
etching of ONON multilayer, the overall etch rate would be dependent on the thickness
of the films, as well as the ion incident energy. It is possible that in ONON multilayer
etching in 3D NAND devices, the non-uniformity of the deposited films could lead to
varying etch rates across the horizontal surface. Due to this, the etch front could be
deflected as it passes the interface of the films resulting to the bending observed in actual
HAR etched channels. Additionally, the desorbed species obtained from the simulations
showed that physically sputtered species increases with increasing ion energy. Opposing
trend on the Si-containing desorbed species was also observed between 200eV and 2,000eV
ion energies. In HAR etching, as the aspect-ratio increases, there is higher possibility of
the desorbed species to be redeposited on the sidewalls of the hole channels resulting to
the tapering of the etched channels.

   In Chapter 4, MD simulations to study the etching of SiO2 and SiN by chlorine-
containing fluorocarbon plasmas were performed. This was done by comparing the simu-
lations of SiO2 and SiN etched by CF3 + ions with and without Cl+ ions injected at 0° and
60°. Interatomic potential models describing F–C–Cl interactions were first developed.
Chapter 6. General Conclusion                                                          111

To validate the models, etching yields from the MD simulations per ion type were com-
pared to experimental etching yields wherein good agreement was attained. Comparing
the MD simulations of SiO2 etched by CF3 + ions with and without Cl+ ions, minimal
change in the etch rate was observed when the ions are injected at 0°. For SiN, similar
trend was only observed when the ion injected at normal incidence has an ion energy
≥ 1, 000eV . When the ion energy is 500eV, the etch rate was reduced due to the deposi-
tion of a passivating FC film that inhibited the etching. In contrast, when the ions are
injected at 60°, a 1.6x increase in the etch rate was observed upon addition of Cl+ ions to
the etching both SiO2 and SiN by CF3 + ions. Based from the results, it was concluded
when thick mixing layer is formed on the material surface, the kinetic energy of the Cl+
ions are spent on etching the C and F from this layer. It is not that Cl+ has no effect to
the etching when injected at 0°. Since an optimum mixing layer is needed in the etching
by fluorocarbon plasmas, the etching by Cl+ ions is negated by the deposition of the C
and F atoms to form the mixing layer. When the ions are injected at 60°, the etching
becomes favourable to physical sputtering, thus the need to deposit the C and F atoms
to facilitate fluorocarbon etching is lessened. Consequently, an increase in the etch rate
would be observed. To further support the findings from the MD simulations, additional
simulation were performed wherein Cl+ ions were replaced with Ar+ . Based from the
results, it was concluded that Cl+ ions primarily etch the C and F atoms by physical
sputtering even at normal incidence except for SiN at 500eV. This was also evidenced by
the apparent increase in the monoatomic C and F desorbed species when the films were
etched by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions. From the results, a mechanism to smoothen tapered
structure in HAR etched channels was proposed in this chapter.

   In Chapter 5, MD simulations to form nano-hole channels in SiO2 film with a diamond
carbon mask and an a−carbon mask by CF3 + ions were performed. Based from the
comparison of the etching with a diamond carbon mask and an a− carbon mask, a less
dense mask have a higher probability of collapsing. As such, it was concluded that the use
of a denser mask would be more advantageous in the etching of hole channels with high
Chapter 6. General Conclusion                                                        112

aspect-ratio. Due to this, etching simulations of SiO2 film with a diamond carbon mask
wherein the CF3 + ions were constrained within the defined hole pattern of the mask were
performed. The results showed that even when the deformation of the mask was greatly
lessened, tapered hole channels would still form. As such, it was concluded that the
redeposition of the sputtered atoms contribute significantly to the tapering phenomenon
which was also exacerbated by the nanometer-scale size of the hole pattern. Additionally,
the sidewalls of the tapered channels were observed to be Si-rich due to the preferential
removal of oxygen. Based on the desorbed species, it was also concluded that the HAR
etching process predicted in the simulation is dominated by physical sputtering. The
effect of the carbon and fluorine flux at the bottom of the hole channel was also studied
by bombarding a flat SiO2 substrate with CF3 radicals and CF3 + ions. It was concluded
that there exists a process window from 25:1 and 50:1 radical-ion ratio where etching
yields of Si and O atoms were doubled. It was concluded that the main effect of the
radicals in etching is to promote chemical sputtering and to balance out the physical
sputtering.

   To summarize, this research was done to study the HAR etching in the the fabrication
of 3D NAND devices. Chapter 2 provided insight on the effect of atomic scale roughness
on the scattering of ions as it hit the HAR sidewalls at grazing angle. In Chapter 3, the
etching of oxide-nitride bilayer representing the alternating ONON layers in actual 3D
devices showed how the thickness of the mixing layer affects the etch rate. In Chapter
4, other plasma chemistry that can be used in HAR etching was explored. Though MD
simulation of hole channel etching was also done as shown in Chapter 5, the findings of
this research could be incorporated in profile simulation that can simulate the macro-
scopic evolution of HAR profiles. In general, this research has shown that MD simulation
supported by ion beam experiment could provide insights in understanding the ion scat-
tering and etching process in semiconductor device fabrication. Since the feature size in
semiconductor devices continues to shrink, the use of MD simulations is becoming more
relevant due to the possibility of direct comparison between simulation and experiment.
Appendix A


Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing
Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2
Surfaces – Supporting Results

In Chapter 2, MD simulations of the scattering of Ne+ , Ar+ , and Xe+ ions on smooth
and rough Si and SiO2 surfaces were discussed. The reflection-angle distributions and the
azimuthal-angle distributions of the ions injected with 1,000 eV ion energy were shown in
Figs. 2.3 and 2.3 respectively. In Ch. 2, the scattering of ions with 100eV energy was also
explored. In this appendix, the reflection-angle distributions and the azimuthal-angle
distributions of the ions injected with 100 eV ion energy are shown in Figs. A.1 and A.2
respectively.




                                           113
                                        114
Appendix A. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2
Surfaces – Supporting Results




                                                                                 Figure A.1: Reflection-angle distributions F (θr ) of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red) and Xe+ (blue) ions reflected on the smooth and rough Si
                                                                                 and SiO2 surfaces defined in Fig. 2.1. The ion incident energy is 100 eV and angles of incidence are 5°, 10° and 20°. The vertical black
                                                                                                 dashed line indicates the specular angle in θr . Note that incident ions may be trapped in the material.
                                                                                                                                               Appendix A. Inert-gas Ion Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2




Figure A.2: Azimuthal-angle distributions G(ϕa ) of Ne+ (green), Ar+ (red) and Xe+ (blue) ions reflected on the smooth and rough
Si and SiO2 surfaces defined in Fig. A.2. The ion incident energy is 100 eV and angles of incidence are 5°, 10° and 20°. Because of
the symmetry G(ϕa ) = G(−ϕa ), G(ϕa ) is plotted only for positive ϕa . The angle of ϕa = 0 is the direction of specular reflection and
|ϕa |< 90◦ indicates the forward scattering. It is seen that, at an incident angle of 20◦ , Ne+ and Ar+ ion incidence may result in backward
                            scattering (i.e., |ϕa |> 90◦ ). Note that incident ions may be trapped in the material.
                                                                                                                                               Surfaces – Supporting Results




                                                                                                                                               115
Appendix B


Etching of ONON Multilayer by CF3+
Ions

In Chapter 3, MD simulation of the etching ON bilayer by CF3 + ions injected at normal
incidence with ion energy from 200eV to 2,000eV were discussed. To study the etching of
an actual ONON multilayer, MD simulation of an ONON multilayer etched by CF3 + ions
injected at normal incidence with ion energies from 200eV to 6,000eV were performed.
The change in depth as a function of ion dose is plotted in Fig. B.1. Until an ion energy
of 3,000eV, change in the etch rate as the material transitions from oxide to nitride and
vice versa can be observed in Fig. B.1. Since a much thicker oxide film was used in these
simulations unlike in Ch. 3, a single etch rate was only observed at much higher energies
(> 3,000eV). Note that the results from 3,000eV to 6,000eV are preliminary data that
requires further studies and verification with experiment. Nonetheless, this observation
supports the conclusion in Ch. 3 wherein the change in etch rate is dependent on the
thickness of the films and the ion energy used. The thickness of the films used in the
simulations are similar to the thickness of ONON films deposited on Si wafers provided by
Lam Research Corp. This was done to have a direct comparison between MD simulation
and experiment.


                                          117
Appendix B. Etching of ONON Multilayer by CF3 + Ions                                      118




   Figure B.1: The change of the surface height (i.e., depth) as a function of ion dose
   with ion incident energies from 200eV to 6,000eV, obtained from MD simulation. The
                 dashed lines indicate the interface of the oxide and nitride.
Appendix C


MD Simulation of Oxide and Nitride
Etching by CF3+ and Cl+ –
Supporting Results


C.1      Fluorocarbon and Chlorine Interatomic Potential

         Model

The three-body V3 potential models for all possible combinations of chlorine interacting
with the system containing Si, O, N, C, and F are summarized in this appendix. Details
of the calculations had already been discussed in Chapter 4.




                                          119
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       120




                   (a)                                     (b)




                   (c)                                     (d)




                   (e)                                     (f)
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       121




                     (g)                                            (h)




                     (i)                                            (j)




                     (k)                                            (l)

   Figure C.2:        The three-body V3 potential energies are plotted as a func-
   tion of the angle θ for various configurations of Cl with C as the center atom.
   The data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curves are ob-
   tained from fitting V3 interaction described by Eq. 1.8.           The DFT calcula-
   tions were done on (a) chlorofluoromethane CH2 ClF; (b) chloroethane CH3 CH2 Cl;
   (c) dichloromethane CH2 Cl2 ; (d) chloromethane CH3 Cl; (e) chloromethylazanide
   CH2 NH2 Cl; (f) trichloro(chloromethyl)silane Si(CH2 Cl)Cl3 ; (g) hydroxychloromethyl-
   radical CH2 ClOH; (h) vinyl chloride C2 H3 Cl; (i) formyl chloride CHClO; (j)
   chloromethylideneazanide CHClN- ; (k) 2-chloroethynyl C2 Cl; and (l) cyanogen chlo-
   ride CNCl. The bond lengths of all atoms are maintained. Only the angle θ was varied
                           without changing the azimuthal angle.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       122




                     (a)                                               (b)




                     (c)                                               (d)




                     (e)                                               (f)

   Figure C.3: The three-body V3 potential energies are plotted as a function of the
   angle θ for various configurations of Cl with (a)–(c) Si and (d)–(f) O as the center atom.
   The data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curves are obtained from
   fitting V3 interaction described by Eq. 1.8. The DFT calculation were done on the fol-
   lowing molecules: (a) chloro(methyl)silane ClCH3 SiH2 ; (b) chlorofluorosilane ClFSiH2 ;
   (c) alpha-Chlorosilanamine ClH4 NSi; (d) methyl hypochlorite CH3 ClO; (e) chloro hy-
   pofluorite ClFO; and (f) amino hypochlorite ClH2 NO. The bond lengths of all atoms
     are maintained. Only the angle θ was varied without changing the azimuthal angle.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       123




                     (a)                                             (b)




                     (c)                                             (d)




                     (e)                                             (f)

   Figure C.4: The three-body V3 potential energies are plotted as a function of the
   angle θ for various configurations of Cl with N as the center atom (single bonds). The
   data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curves are obtained from fitting
   V3 interaction described by Eq. 1.8. The DFT calculation were done on the following
   molecules: (a) methylchloroamine CH4 ClN; (b) ClFHN; (c) chloramine NH2 Cl; (d)
   1-chlorohydrazine ClH3 N2 ; (e) hydroxylamine ClH2 NO; and (f) SiH4 ClN. The bond
   lengths of all atoms are maintained. Only the angle θ was varied without changing the
                                       azimuthal angle.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       124




                     (a)                                             (b)

   Figure C.5: The three-body V3 potential energies are plotted as a function of the
   angle θ for various configurations of Cl with N as the center atom (double bonds). The
   data points are obtained from DFT calculations, and the curves are obtained from fitting
   V3 interaction described by Eq. 1.8. The DFT calculation were done on the following
   molecules: (a) chlorine isocyanide CClN; and (b) nitrosyl chloride NOCl. The bond
   lengths of all atoms are maintained. Only the angle θ was varied without changing the
                                       azimuthal angle.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       125

C.2     Depth Profiles of SiO2 and SiN Etched by CF3+

        and Cl+

The depth profiles of atomic densities for both SiO2 and SiN etched by CF3 + ions with
Cl+ ions and just CF3 + ions injected at 0° and 60° are summarized in this appendix.




   Figure C.6: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for SiO2 etched by 500eV
   CF3 + & Cl+ injected at (a) 0° and (b) 60°, compared to SiO2 etched by 500eV CF3 +
   ions injected at (c) 0° and (d) 60°. The depth profiles were taken at the same ion dose of
   2.85x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . The origin of the vertical axis is the position of the material’s
   top surface prior to etching. The vertical axes have different ranges but same increment.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       126




   Figure C.7: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for SiO2 etched by 1,000eV
   CF3 + & Cl+ injected at (a) 0° and (b) 60°, compared to SiO2 etched by 1,000eV CF3 +
   ions injected at (c) 0° and (d) 60°. The depth profiles were taken at the same ion dose of
   2.79x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . The origin of the vertical axis is the position of the material’s
   top surface prior to etching. The vertical axes have different ranges but same increment.




   Figure C.8: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for SiO2 etched by 2,000eV
   CF3 + & Cl+ injected at (a) 0° and (b) 60°, compared to SiO2 etched by 2,000eV CF3 +
   ions injected at (c) 0° and (d) 60°. The depth profiles were taken at the same ion dose of
   1.87x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . The origin of the vertical axis is the position of the material’s
   top surface prior to etching. The vertical axes have different ranges but same increment.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       127




   Figure C.9: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for SiN etched by 1,000eV
   CF3 + & Cl+ injected at (a) 0° and (b) 60°, compared to SiN etched by 1,000eV CF3 +
   ions injected at (c) 0° and (d) 60°. The depth profiles were taken at the same ion dose of
   2.98x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . The origin of the vertical axis is the position of the material’s
   top surface prior to etching. The vertical axes have different ranges but same increment.




   Figure C.10: The depth profiles of the atomic densities for SiN etched by 2,000eV
   CF3 + & Cl+ injected at (a) 0° and (b) 60°, compared to SiN etched by 2,000eV CF3 +
   ions injected at (c) 0° and (d) 60°. The depth profiles were taken at the same ion dose of
   2.23x1016 CF3 + ions/cm2 . The origin of the vertical axis is the position of the material’s
   top surface prior to etching. The vertical axes have different ranges but same increment.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       128

C.3     Etch Rate of SiO2 and SiN Etched by CF3+ and

        Ar+




   Figure C.11: Etch rate as a function of ion energy for (a) SiO2 and (b) SiN etched
   by CF3 + ions with Cl+ ions denoted by square markers, by CF3 + ions only denoted by
   circle markers, and by CF3 + ions with Ar+ ions denoted by diamond markers. The ions
       are injected at 0° and 60° incident angles. The lines are just guides to the eyes.
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       129

C.4     Desorbed Species from the Etching of SiN by CF3+

        and Cl+




                   (a)                                     (b)




                   (c)                                     (d)




                   (e)                                     (f)
Appendix C. MD Simulation of SiO2 and SiN Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ – Supporting
Results                                                                       130




                     (g)                                            (h)




                     (i)                                            (j)




                     (k)                                            (l)




                    (m)                                             (n)

   Figure C.12: The yield of the desorbed species as a function of ion energy for SiN
   etched by CF3 + ions with and without addition of Cl+ ions. The yield is calculated as
   the number of specified desorbed species over the total number of injected CF3 + ions.
Appendix D


MD Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching
by FC Plasmas – Supplementary
Material


D.1      Interatomic Potential Functions

The interatomic potential functions introduced in Sec.II are discussed briefly in this sup-
plementary document. The interatomic potential model for the Si–O–C–F system is based
on SW-type [48, 49, 108] potential where the total potential energy Φ is the summation
of the two-body V2 and three-body V3 interactions given by


                                 X                   X
                            Φ=         V2 (i, j) +           V3 (i, j, k).
                                 i<j                 i<j<k



   In this SW-type potential model, all atoms are considered to be charge-neutral. Based
on previous studies [45, 50, 74, 110, 115], the two-body V2 interaction between the i th
and j th atoms would be dependent on their interatomic distance rij , and is given by


                                              131
Appendix D. MD Simulation Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by FC Plasmas –
Supplementary Material                                                                                            132

                                                                                          
                                                2d                                    d
            V2 (i, j) = ar   −2q
                                   exp                      − br   −q
                                                                        exp                      , if rij < rc   (D.1)
                                             rij − rc                             rij − rc


where a, b, d, q, and rc are parameters with rc being the interatomic cutoff distance. The
two-body V2 interaction would be zero if rij ≥ rc .

   The three-body V3 interaction describes the angular dependencies of the i th , j th , and
k th atoms given by



           V3 (i, j, k) = hjik (rij , rik , θjik ) + hijk (rji , rjk , θijk ) + hikj (rki , rkj , θikj ).        (D.2)


   The h function in Eq. D.2 is dependent on the angle between three atoms θ (the vertex
atom is denoted by the center subscript), and the distances r of the two atoms from the
vertex atom given by



                  hijk (rji , rjk , θijk ) = kijk |cos θijk − Θijk |γijk fij (rij )fjk (rjk ).                   (D.3)


where k, Θ, and γ are parameters. The f function in Eq. D.3 prevents the overestimation
of the angular dependency, and is dependent on V2 given by

                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                 1,           r ≤ rmin ,
                                                
                                                
                                   fij (r) =      V2 (r)
                                                 V2min
                                                         , rmin < r < rc ,
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                0,
                                                          r > rc ,


where rmin is the distance between the i th and j th at the minimum two-body interaction
energy V2min .

   The parameters for two-body V2 and three-body V3 potential functions are determined
by Levenberg-Marquardt nonlinear fitting of the potential energy curve of various atomic
Appendix D. MD Simulation Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by FC Plasmas –
Supplementary Material                                                             133

                Table D.1: Parameters for two-body V2 potential functions.

                                  a         b       d     q   rc
                        Si–Si   170.0     38.3    0.614 1.89 3.6
                        Si–O    122.0     44.6    0.453 2.52 2.5
                        Si–C    122.0      44.9   0.176 2.86 2.8
                         Si–F    75.6     41.7    0.269 2.21 2.6
                         C–C     90.1     36.4    0.972 1.30 2.5
                       *
                         C=C               41.9   0.678 1.73
                       *
                         C≡C              103.0    1.82 1.02             1
                         C–O       35.1   23.1    0.302 2.16 2.3
                       *
                         C=O               45.7   0.616 2.18
                       *
                         C≡O              51.8    0.652 2.04
                         C–F       20.2   20.2    0.113 2.39 2.3
                        O–O        20.7    11.0   0.481 2.06 2.4
                       *
                         O=O              69.6     2.34 0.209
                         O–F       47.4   20.8    0.659 2.33 2.2
                         F–F       13.8   9.59    0.137 2.58 2.2


configurations. The potential energy curves are obtained from ab initio quantum mechan-
ical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) using the software Gaussian
with B3LYP/6-311G basis set [52]. The DFT data for two-body V2 are obtained by scan-
ning the distance between two atoms. For three-body V3 , the DFT data are obtained
by scanning the angle between three atoms. The parameters obtained for the two-body
V2 and three-body V3 potential functions are summarized in Table D.1 and Table D.2
respectively.


                Table D.2: Parameters for three-body V3 potential functions.

                          j–i–k                    k        Θ      γ
                        Si–Si–Si                  2.14   -0.333   2.00
                        Si–Si–O                   1.72   -0.333   2.00
                        Si–Si–C                   2.60   -0.333   2.00
                        Si–Si–F                   2.08   -0.333   2.00
                        O–Si–O                    3.07   -0.333   2.00
                        O–Si–C                    2.81   -0.333   2.00
                        O–Si–F                    2.26   -0.333   2.00
                        C–Si–C                    3.42   -0.333   2.00
                        C–Si–F                    2.62   -0.333   2.00
                        F–Si–F                    2.75   -0.333   2.00
                        O–O–O                     5.00    0.000   0.00
                        O–O–Si                    5.00    0.000   0.00
Appendix D. MD Simulation Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by FC Plasmas –
Supplementary Material                                                                134

                               Continuation of Table ??
                         j–i–k                 k     Θ         γ
                       O–O–C                 2.21 -0.494      2.00
                       O–O–F                 3.53 -0.214      2.00
                       Si–O–Si               1.31 -0.721      2.00
                       Si–O–C                2.86 -0.524      2.00
                       Si–O–F                2.98 -0.400      2.00
                       C–O–C                 4.78 -0.413      2.00
                       C–O–F                 2.08 -0.468      2.00
                       F–O–F                 6.22 -0.273      2.00
                       C–C–C                 4.76 -0.333      2.00
                       C–C–Si                2.96 -0.333      2.00
                       C–C–O                 3.66 -0.333      2.00
                       C–C–F                 4.28 -0.333      2.00
                       Si–C–Si               2.17 -0.332      2.00
                       Si–C–O                2.72 -0.333      2.00
                       Si–C–F                3.09 -0.330      2.00
                       O–C–O                 3.67 -0.333      2.00
                       O–C–F                 4.54 -0.333      2.00
                        F–C–F                6.39 -0.333      2.00
                       C–C=C                 4.62 -0.469      2.00
                       Si–C=C                3.57 -0.976      2.00
                       O–C=C (O=C–C) 4.59 -0.447              2.00
                       F–C=C                 5.40 -0.461      2.00
                       O–C=O                 5.68 -0.460      2.00
                       F–C=O                 7.48 -0.575      2.00
                       C=C=C (C–C≡C) 2.56 -1.000              1.73
                       O=C=C (O–C≡C) 2.44 -1.000              1.33
                       Si-C≡C                1.67 -1.000      1.13
                       F-C≡C                 2.74 -1.000      1.20
                       O=C=O                 6.62 -1.000      1.20



   The Van der Waals (vdW) interactions among the atoms are also considered in the
simulations and is given by

                    n  σ 12  σ 6 o                    
                                               d1     d2
       VvdW (r) = 4ϵ         −         exp         −         if c2 < r < c1 ,
                        r       r            r − c1 r − c2                          (D.4)
               otherwise VvdW (r) = 0,


where ϵ = 0.0108 eV, σ = 3.5 Å, d1 = d2 = 0.1 Å, c1 = 8.0 Åand c2 = 3.5 Å. The
repulsive interaction of the Van der Waals is not included since the repulsive interaction
of the atoms is already accounted by the two-body V2 potential that describes covalent
Appendix D. MD Simulation Study of SiO2 Nanohole Etching by FC Plasmas –
Supplementary Material                                                                     135

bonding. Also, the minimum bond energy in Van der Waals interactions is extremely
small (⋍ 10-2 eV) in comparison to typical covalent bonds (several eV) [53]




D.2      Deposition of CF3 Radicals

The deposition simulation of FC layers on SiO2 films by CF3 radicals is briefly discussed
here. As discussed in Sec.II of the main manuscript, the average kinetic energy of radicals
at 300K should be 0.026eV. However, to reduce the traveling time of the CF3 radicals to
reach the surface, we used 0.5eV in our simulations. We also stated there that the nature
of radical deposition on the surface was not affected. To support this, we have irradiated
a 4.19nm × 4.19nm SiO2 film surface with CF3 radicals with energies of 0.026eV and
0.5eV. The injection cycle is essentially the same as the one discussed in Sec. II but with
a shortened cooling time of 300fs. As such, the total injection cycle is 1,000 fs. Since the
energy of the impact particles is quite low, we have shortened the cooling time to achieve
faster simulations.

   The simulation results, i.e., snapshots of SiO2 films with FC layers deposited by
0.026eV and 0.5eV CF3 radicals are shown in Fig. D.1. After 1,000 injections (5.7 × 1015
cm−2 dose), similar ≈2nm-thick FC layers with an F/C ratio of 3.0 were obtained for
both cases.




    Figure D.1:       Snapshots of SiO2 film injected with (a) 0.026eV and (b) 0.5eV CF3
                                   radicals (1,000 injections).
Bibliography

[1] F. Masuoka, M. Asano, H. Iwahashi, T. Komuro, and S. Tanaka, “A new flash
   e2 prom cell using triple polysilicon technology,” in 1984 International Electron De-
   vices Meeting, pp. 464–467, 1984.

[2] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, and A. Marelli, Inside NAND flash memories. Springer,
   2010.

[3] Toshiba America Electronic Components Inc., “Nand vs. nor flash memory technol-
   ogy overview.”

[4] F. Masuoka, M. Momodomi, Y. Iwata, and R. Shirota, “New ultra high density
   eprom and flash eeprom with nand structure cell,” in 1987 International Electron
   Devices Meeting, pp. 552–555, 1987.

[5] A. S. Spinelli, C. M. Compagnoni, and A. L. Lacaita, “Reliability of nand flash
   memories: Planar cells and emerging issues in 3d devices,” Computers, vol. 6, no. 2,
   2017.

[6] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, C. Zambelli, and P. Olivo, “Architectural and Integration
   Options for 3D NAND Flash Memories,” Computers, vol. 6, no. 27, 2017.

[7] M. Helm, J.-K. Park, A. Ghalam, J. Guo, C. wan Ha, C. Hu, H. Kim,
   K. Kavalipurapu, E. Lee, A. Mohammadzadeh, D. Nguyen, V. Patel, T. Pekny,
   B. Saiki, D. Song, J. Tsai, V. Viajedor, L. Vu, T. Wong, J. H. Yun, R. Ghodsi,
   A. D’Alessandro, D. Di Cicco, and V. Moschiano, “19.1 a 128gb mlc nand-flash

                                         137
Bibliography                                                                          138

     device using 16nm planar cell,” in 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits
     Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC), pp. 326–327, 2014.

  [8] S. Choi, D. Kim, S. Choi, B. Kim, S. Jung, K. Chun, N. Kim, W. Lee, T. Shin,
     H. Jin, H. Cho, S. Ahn, Y. Hong, I. Yang, B. Kim, P. Yoo, Y. Jung, J. Lee, J. Shin,
     T. Kim, K. Park, and J. Kim, “19.2 a 93.4mm2 64gb mlc nand-flash memory with
     16nm cmos technology,” in 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference
     Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC), pp. 328–329, 2014.

  [9] S. Lee, J.-y. Lee, I.-h. Park, J. Park, S.-w. Yun, M.-s. Kim, J.-h. Lee, M. Kim,
     K. Lee, T. Kim, B. Cho, D. Cho, S. Yun, J.-n. Im, H. Yim, K.-h. Kang, S. Jeon,
     S. Jo, Y.-l. Ahn, S.-M. Joe, S. Kim, D.-k. Woo, J. Park, H.-w. Park, Y. Kim,
     J. Park, Y. Choi, M. Hirano, J.-D. Ihm, B. Jeong, S.-K. Lee, M. Kim, H. Lee,
     S. Seo, H. Jeon, C.-h. Kim, H. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Yim, H. Kim, D.-S. Byeon, H.-J.
     Yang, K.-T. Park, K.-h. Kyung, and J.-H. Choi, “7.5 a 128gb 2b/cell nand flash
     memory in 14nm technology with tprog=640µs and 800mb/s i/o rate,” in 2016
     IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), pp. 138–139, 2016.

 [10] Entegris, “White paper: Considerations for improving 3d nand performance, relia-
     bility, and yield.”

 [11] A. Silvagni, “3d nand flash based on planar cells,” Computers, vol. 6, no. 4, 2017.

 [12] T. Endoh, K. Kinoshita, T. Tanigami, Y. Wada, K. Sato, K. Yamada, T. Yokoyama,
     N. Takeuchi, K. Tanaka, N. Awaya, K. Sakiyama, and F. Masuoka, “Novel ul-
     tra high density flash memory with a stacked-surrounding gate transistor (s-sgt)
     structured cell,” in International Electron Devices Meeting. Technical Digest (Cat.
     No.01CH37224), pp. 2.3.1–2.3.4, 2001.

 [13] H. Tanaka, M. Kido, K. Yahashi, M. Oomura, R. Katsumata, M. Kito, Y. Fukuzumi,
     M. Sato, Y. Nagata, Y. Matsuoka, Y. Iwata, H. Aochi, and A. Nitayama, “Bit
     cost scalable technology with punch and plug process for ultra high density flash
     memory,” in 2007 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology, pp. 14–15, 2007.
Bibliography                                                                              139

 [14] A. Goda, “3-D NAND Technology Achievements and Future Scaling Perspectives,”
     IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1373–1381, 2020.

 [15] K. Kim and S. Lee, “Memory technology in the future,” Microelectron. Eng., vol. 84,
     no. 9, pp. 1976–1981, 2007. INFOS 2007.

 [16] K. Parat and A. Goda, “Scaling trends in nand flash,” in 2018 IEEE International
     Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), pp. 2.1.1–2.1.4, 2018.

 [17] A. Nitayama and H. Aochi, “Vertical 3D NAND Flash Memory Technology,” ECS
     Trans., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 15–25, 2011.

 [18] Y. Fukuzumi, R. Katsumata, M. Kito, M. Kido, M. Sato, H. Tanaka, Y. Nagata,
     Y. Matsuoka, Y. Iwata, H. Aochi, and A. Nitayama, “Optimal integration and
     characteristics of vertical array devices for ultra-high density, bit-cost scalable flash
     memory,” in 2007 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting, pp. 449–452, 2007.

 [19] J.-W. Im, W.-P. Jeong, D.-H. Kim, S.-W. Nam, D.-K. Shim, M.-H. Choi, H.-J.
     Yoon, D.-H. Kim, Y.-S. Kim, H.-W. Park, D.-H. Kwak, S.-W. Park, S.-M. Yoon,
     W.-G. Hahn, J.-H. Ryu, S.-W. Shim, K.-T. Kang, S.-H. Choi, J.-D. Ihm, Y.-S.
     Min, I.-M. Kim, D.-S. Lee, J.-H. Cho, O.-S. Kwon, J.-S. Lee, M.-S. Kim, S.-H. Joo,
     J.-H. Jang, S.-W. Hwang, D.-S. Byeon, H.-J. Yang, K.-T. Park, K.-H. Kyung, and
     J.-H. Choi, “7.2 a 128gb 3b/cell v-nand flash memory with 1gb/s i/o rate,” in 2015
     IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference - (ISSCC) Digest of Technical
     Papers, pp. 1–3, 2015.

 [20] K. Nojiri, Dry Etching Technology for Semiconductors. Springer, 2015.

 [21] G. S. May and C. J. Spanos, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Manufacturing and
     Process Control. IEEE, 2006.

 [22] MEMS and Nanotechnology Exchange, “Etching processes.”
Bibliography                                                                            140

 [23] F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion. Springer, third ed.,
     2018.

 [24] B. Wu, A. Kumar, and S. Pamarthy, “High aspect ratio silicon etch: A review,” J.
     Appl. Phys., vol. 108, no. 5, p. 51101, 2010.

 [25] C. Cardinaud, M.-C. Peignon, and P.-Y. Tessier, “Plasma etching: principles, mech-
     anisms, application to micro- and nano-technologies,” Appl. Surf. Sci., vol. 164,
     no. 1, pp. 72–83, 2000. Surface Science in Micro & Nanotechnology.

 [26] Y.-Y. Tu, T. J. Chuang, and H. F. Winters, “Chemical sputtering of fluorinated
     silicon,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 23, pp. 823–835, Jan 1981.

 [27] M. A. Lieberman and A. J. Lichtenberg, Principles of Plasma Discharges and Ma-
     terials Processing. John Wiley & Sons, 2nd ed., 2005.

 [28] I. Adamovich, S. D. Baalrud, A. Bogaerts, P. J. Bruggeman, M. Cappelli,
     V. Colombo, U. Czarnetzki, U. Ebert, J. G. Eden, P. Favia, D. B. Graves, S. Ham-
     aguchi, G. Hieftje, M. Hori, I. D. Kaganovich, U. Kortshagen, M. J. Kushner, N. J.
     Mason, S. Mazouffre, S. M. Thagard, H.-R. Metelmann, A. Mizuno, E. Moreau,
     A. B. Murphy, B. A. Niemira, G. S. Oehrlein, Z. L. Petrovic, L. C. Pitchford, Y.-K.
     Pu, S. Rauf, O. Sakai, S. Samukawa, S. Starikovskaia, J. Tennyson, K. Terashima,
     M. M. Turner, M. C. M. van de Sanden, and A. Vardelle, “The 2017 Plasma
     Roadmap: Low Temperature Plasma Science and Technology,” J. Phys. D: Appl.
     Phys., vol. 50, p. 323001, 7 2017.

 [29] H. F. Winters, J. W. Coburn, and E. Kay, “Plasma etching a "pseudo-black-box"
     approach,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 4973–4983, 1977.

 [30] J. W. Coburn, H. F. Winters, and T. J. Chuang, “Ion-surface interactions in plasma
     etching,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 3532–3540, 1977.

 [31] H. F. Winters, “The role of chemisorption in plasma etching,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 49,
     no. 10, pp. 5165–5170, 1978.
Bibliography                                                                           141

 [32] J. W. Coburn and H. F. Winters, “Plasma etching—a discussion of mechanisms,”
     J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 391–403, 1979.

 [33] M. J. Kushner, “A kinetic study of the plasma-etching process. i. a model for the
     etching of si and sio2 in cn fm /h2 and cn fm /o2 plasmas,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 53,
     no. 4, pp. 2923–2938, 1982.

 [34] R. A. Heinecke, “Control of relative etch rates of sio2 and si in plasma etching,”
     Solid State Electron., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1146–1147, 1975.

 [35] M. Izawa, N. Negishi, K. Yokogawa, and Y. Momonoi, “Investigation of bowing
     reduction in SiO2 etching taking into account radical sticking in a hole,” Jpn. J.
     Appl. Phys., vol. 46, pp. 7870–7874, Dec 2007.

 [36] M. Miyake, N. Negishi, M. Izawa, K. Yokogawa, M. Oyama, and T. Kanekiyo,
     “Effects of mask and necking deformation on bowing and twisting in high-aspect-
     ratio contact hole etching,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 48, p. 08HE01, aug 2009.

 [37] J. K. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. I. Cho, and G. Y. Yeom, “Study on contact distortion
     during high aspect ratio contact sio2 etching,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 33,
     no. 2, p. 021303, 2015.

 [38] K. Karahashi and S. Hamaguchi, “Ion beam experiments for the study of
     plasma–surface interactions,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 47, no. 22, p. 224008,
     2014.

 [39] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding molecular simulation: From algorithms to
     applications. Academic Press, 2002.

 [40] B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright, “Studies in molecular dynamics. i. general
     method,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 459–466, 1959.

 [41] N. Brambilla, G. a. Krein, J. Tarrús Castellà, and A. Vairo, “Born-Oppenheimer
     approximation in an effective field theory language,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 97, no. 1,
     p. 016016, 2018.
Bibliography                                                                           142

 [42] I. M. Torrens, Interatomic Potentials. Academic Press, 1972.

 [43] M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer simulation of liquids. Oxford University
     Press, 2017.

 [44] S. Hug, Chapter 6 Classical Molecular Dynamics in a Nutshell, p. 127–152. Humana
     Press, 2013.

 [45] H. Ohta and S. Hamaguchi, “Classical interatomic potentials for Si–O–F and
     Si–O–Cl systems,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 115, pp. 6679–6690, 9 2001.

 [46] R. LeSar, Introduction to Computational Materials Science: Fundamentals to Ap-
     plications. Cambridge University Press, 2016.

 [47] C. M. Cagomoc, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Deep-Hole Etching for Flash
     Memory Applications. MS dissertation, Osaka University, 2019.

 [48] F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, “Computer simulation of local order in condensed
     phases of silicon,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 31, pp. 5262–5271, 4 1985.

 [49] F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, “Molecular dynamics simulation for chemically
     reactive substances. Fluorine,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 88, pp. 5123–5133, 4 1988.

 [50] H. Ohta, Molecular dynamics simulation of the plasma-surface interaction during
     plasma etching processes. PhD dissertation, Kyoto University, 2004.

 [51] E. J. C. Tinacba, Molecular dynamics simulation study of Si-based materials etching
     processes. PhD dissertation, Osaka University, 2021.

 [52] M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R.
     Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji,
     M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L.
     Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida,
     T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. A. Montgomery, J. E.
     Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N.
Bibliography                                                                         143

     Staroverov, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Rendell, J. C. Burant,
     S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox,
     J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann,
     O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Mar-
     tin, K. Morokuma, V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg,
     S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, Farkas, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, J. Cioslowski, and
     D. J. Fox, “Gaussian 09,” 2009. Gaussian Inc. Wallingford CT.

 [53] S. Hamaguchi and H. Ohta, “Effects of Van der Waals Interactions on SiO2 Etching
     by CFx Plasmas,” J. Plasma Fusion Res. SERIES, vol. 6, pp. 399–401, 2004.

 [54] L. Verlet, “Computer "experiments" on classical fluids. i. thermodynamical proper-
     ties of lennard-jones molecules,” Phys. Rev., vol. 159, pp. 98–103, Jul 1967.

 [55] S. Nosé, “A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the canonical ensemble,”
     Mol. Phys., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 255–268, 1984.

 [56] W. G. Hoover, “Canonical dynamics: Equilibrium phase-space distributions,” Phys.
     Rev. A, vol. 31, pp. 1695–1697, Mar 1985.

 [57] T. Schneider and E. Stoll, “Molecular-dynamics study of a three-dimensional one-
     component model for distortive phase transitions,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 17, pp. 1302–
     1322, 2 1978.

 [58] H. J. Berendsen, J. P. Postma, W. F. Van Gunsteren, A. Dinola, and J. R. Haak,
     “Molecular dynamics with coupling to an external bath,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 81,
     no. 8, pp. 3684–3690, 1984.

 [59] S. C. Harvey, R. K.-Z. Tan, and T. E. Cheatham III, “The Flying Ice Cube: Velocity
     Rescaling in Molecular Dynamics Leads to Violation of Energy Equipartition,” J.
     Comput. Chem., vol. 19, no. 7, 1998.

 [60] K. Miyake, T. Ito, M. Isobe, K. Karahashi, M. Fukasawa, K. Nagahata, T. Tatsumi,
     and S. Hamaguchi, “Characterization of polymer layer formation during SiO2 /SiN
Bibliography                                                                           144

     etching by fluoro/hydrofluorocarbon plasmas,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 53, no. 3S2,
     p. 03DD02, 2014.

 [61] K. Mizotani, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamic simulation of dam-
     age formation at Si vertical walls by grazing incidence of energetic ions in gate
     etching processes,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 33, no. 2, p. 21313, 2015.

 [62] S. Numazawa, K. Machida, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics
     study on fluorine radical multilayer adsorption mechanism during Si, SiO2 , and
     Si3 N4 etching processes,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 55, p. 116204, 10 2016.

 [63] E. J. Capdos Tinacba, M. Isobe, K. Karahashi, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular
     dynamics simulation of Si and SiO2 reactive ion etching by fluorine-rich ion species,”
     Surf. Coat. Technol., vol. 380, p. 125032, 12 2019.

 [64] H. Yamada and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular-dynamics simulations of organic polymer
     etching by hydrocarbon beams,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 96, pp. 6147–6152, 11 2004.

 [65] H. Yamada and S. Hamaguchi, “Numerical analyses of surface interactions between
     radical beams and organic polymer surfaces,” Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion, vol. 47,
     p. A11–A18, 4 2005.

 [66] T. Kawase and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulation analyses on injection
     angle dependence of SiO2 sputtering yields by fluorocarbon beams,” Thin Solid
     Films, vol. 515, no. 12, pp. 4883–4886, 2007.

 [67] M. Yamashiro, H. Yamada, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulation
     study on substrate temperature dependence of sputtering yields for an organic poly-
     mer under ion bombardment,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 101, no. 4, p. 46108, 2007.

 [68] M. Taguchi and S. Hamaguchi, “MD simulations of amorphous SiO2 thin film forma-
     tion in reactive sputtering deposition processes,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 515, no. 12,
     pp. 4879–4882, 2007.
Bibliography                                                                          145

 [69] M. Yamashiro, H. Yamada, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular Dynamics Simulations
     of Organic Polymer Dry Etching at High Substrate Temperatures,” Jpn. J. Appl.
     Phys., vol. 46, pp. 1692–1699, 4 2007.

 [70] M. Yamashiro, H. Yamada, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulations
     for nitridation of organic polymer surfaces due to hydrogen–nitrogen ion beam
     injections,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 516, no. 11, pp. 3449–3453, 2008.

 [71] Y. Murakami, S. Horiguchi, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulation of
     the formation of sp 3 hybridized bonds in hydrogenated diamondlike carbon depo-
     sition processes,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 81, p. 41602, 4 2010.

 [72] E. J. C. Tinacba, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi, “Surface damage formation during
     atomic layer etching of silicon with chlorine adsorption,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A,
     vol. 39, p. 042603, 6 2021.

 [73] D. W. Hess, “Plasma–material interactions,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A., vol. 8, no. 3,
     pp. 1677–1684, 1990.

 [74] H. Ohta and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulation of silicon and sili-
     con dioxide etching by energetic halogen beams,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 19,
     pp. 2373–2381, 9 2001.

 [75] G. H. Lee, S. Hwang, J. Yu, and H. Kim, “Architecture and process integration
     overview of 3d nand flash technologies,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 15, 2021.

 [76] B. N. Chapman, Glow Discharge Processes: Sputtering and Plasma Etching. Wiley,
     1980.

 [77] S. Hamaguchi, “Modeling and simulation methods for plasma processing,” IBM J.
     Res. Dev., vol. 43, no. 1.2, pp. 199–215, 1999.

 [78] T. Makabe and Z. L. Petrović, Plasma Electronics: Applications in Microelectronic
     Device Fabrication. CRC Press, 2nd ed., 2016.
Bibliography                                                                          146

 [79] I. Adamovich, S. Agarwal, E. Ahedo, L. L. Alves, S. Baalrud, N. Babaeva, A. Bo-
     gaerts, A. Bourdon, P. J. Bruggeman, C. Canal, E. H. Choi, S. Coulombe, Z. Donkó,
     D. B. Graves, S. Hamaguchi, D. Hegemann, M. Hori, H.-H. Kim, G. M. W. Kroe-
     sen, M. J. Kushner, A. Laricchiuta, X. Li, T. E. Magin, S. M. Thagard, V. Miller,
     A. B. Murphy, G. S. Oehrlein, N. Puac, R. M. Sankaran, S. Samukawa, M. Shi-
     ratani, M. Šimek, N. Tarasenko, K. Terashima, E. T. Jr, J. Trieschmann, S. Tsikata,
     M. M. Turner, I. J. van der Walt, M. C. M. van de Sanden, and T. von Woedtke,
     “The 2022 Plasma Roadmap: low temperature plasma science and technology,” J.
     Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 55, p. 373001, 7 2022.

 [80] G. S. Oehrlein and S. Hamaguchi, “Foundations of low-temperature plasma en-
     hanced materials synthesis and etching,” Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., vol. 27,
     no. 2, p. 023001, 2018.

 [81] T. Iwase, K. Yokogawa, and M. Mori, “Eliminating dependence of hole depth on
     aspect ratio by forming ammonium bromide during plasma etching of deep holes
     in silicon nitride and silicon dioxide,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 57, p. 06JC03, may
     2018.

 [82] T. Iwase, Y. Kamaji, S. Y. Kang, K. Koga, N. Kuboi, M. Nakamura, N. Negishi,
     T. Nozaki, S. Nunomura, D. Ogawa, M. Omura, T. Shimizu, K. Shinoda, Y. Sonoda,
     H. Suzuki, K. Takahashi, T. Tsutsumi, K. Yoshikawa, T. Ishijima, and K. Ishikawa,
     “Progress and perspectives in dry processes for nanoscale feature fabrication: fine
     pattern transfer and high-aspect-ratio feature formation,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.,
     vol. 58, p. SE0802, may 2019.

 [83] M. Omura, J. Hashimoto, T. Adachi, Y. Kondo, M. Ishikawa, J. Abe, I. Sakai,
     H. Hayashi, M. Sekine, and M. Hori, “Formation mechanism of sidewall striation in
     high-aspect-ratio hole etching,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 58, p. SEEB02, may 2019.
Bibliography                                                                          147

 [84] K. Arts, S. Hamaguchi, T. Ito, K. Karahashi, H. Knoops, A. Mackus, and W. M.
     Kessels, “Foundations of atomic-level plasma processing in nanoelectronics,” Plasma
     Sources Sci. Technol., 2022.

 [85] T. Ito, K. Karahashi, K. Mizotani, M. Isobe, S.-Y. Kang, M. Honda, and S. Ham-
     aguchi, “Si damage due to oblique-angle ion impact relevant for vertical gate etching
     processes,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 51, p. 08HB01, aug 2012.

 [86] Y. Du, F. Kruger, S. K. Nam, H. Lee, S. Yoo, J. Eapen, M. J. Kushner, and
     S. Shannon, “Comparison of glancing-angle scatterings on different materials in a
     high aspect ratio plasma etching process using molecular dynamics simulation,” J.
     Vac. Sci. Technol. A., vol. 40, no. 5, p. 053007, 2022.

 [87] S. V. Nguyen, D. Dobuzinsky, S. R. Stiffler, and G. Chrisman, “Substrate trench-
     ing mechanism during plasma and magnetically enhanced polysilicon etching,” J.
     Electrochem. Soc., vol. 138, pp. 1112–1117, apr 1991.

 [88] T. J. Dalton, J. C. Arnold, H. H. Sawin, S. Swan, and D. Corliss, “Microtrench
     formation in polysilicon plasma etching over thin gate oxide,” J. Electrochem. Soc.,
     vol. 140, pp. 2395–2401, aug 1993.

 [89] C. F. Abrams and D. B. Graves, “Energetic ion bombardment of sio2 surfaces:
     Molecular dynamics simulations,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3006–
     3019, 1998.

 [90] C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, to appear,
     2023.

 [91] M. J. Romney and J. B. Anderson, “Scattering of 0.05–5-ev argon from the (111)
     plane of silver,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 2490–2496, 1969.

 [92] W. J. Hays, W. E. Rodgers, and E. L. Knuth, “Scattering of argon beams with
     incident energies up to 20 ev from a (111) silver surface,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 56,
     no. 4, pp. 1652–1657, 1972.
Bibliography                                                                           148

 [93] R. Pfandzelter, T. Hecht, and H. Winter, “Angular distributions of fast noble gas
     atoms and ions after grazing scattering from a cu(111) surface,” Nucl. Instrum.
     Methods Phys. Res. B, vol. 182, no. 1, pp. 213–217, 2001.

 [94] J. M. Haile, Molecular Dynamics Simulation: Elementary Methods. John Wiley &
     Sons, Inc., 1997.

 [95] D. B. Graves and P. Brault, “Molecular dynamics for low temperature plasma sur-
     face interaction studies,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 42, p. 194011, 9 2009.

 [96] S. Hamaguchi, M. Dalvie, R. T. Farouki, and S. Sethuraman, “A shock-tracking
     algorithm for surface evolution under reactive ion etching,” J. Appl. Phys, vol. 74,
     no. 8, pp. 5172–5184, 1993.

 [97] S. Hamaguchi and M. Dalvie, “Microprofile simulations for plasma etching with
     surface passivation,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 2745–2753, 1994.

 [98] S. Hamaguchi and M. Dalvie, “Intrinsic and passivation-induced trench tapering
     during plasma etching,” J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 141, no. 7, pp. 1964–1972, 1994.

 [99] A. A. Mayo, S. Hamaguchi, J. H. Joo, and S. M. Rossnagel, “Across-wafer nonuni-
     formity of long throw sputter deposition,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, vol. 15, no. 5,
     pp. 1788–1793, 1997.

[100] R. J. Hoekstra, M. J. Grapperhaus, and M. J. Kushner, “Integrated plasma equip-
     ment model for polysilicon etch profiles in an inductively coupled plasma reactor
     with subwafer and superwafer topography,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 15, no. 4,
     pp. 1913–1921, 1997.

[101] J. Hoang, C.-C. Hsu, and J. P. Chang, “Feature profile evolution during shallow
     trench isolation etch in chlorine-based plasmas. i. feature scale modeling,” J. Vac.
     Sci. Technol. B, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 1911–1918, 2008.
Bibliography                                                                           149

[102] B. Radjenović and M. Radmilović-Radjenović, “Top down nano technologies in sur-
     face modification of materials,” Cent. Eur. J. Phys., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 265–275,
     2011.

[103] Y. Zhang, C. Huard, S. Sriraman, J. Belen, A. Paterson, and M. J. Kushner, “Inves-
     tigation of feature orientation and consequences of ion tilting during plasma etching
     with a three-dimensional feature profile simulator,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 35,
     no. 2, p. 021303, 2017.

[104] C. M. Huard, Y. Zhang, S. Sriraman, A. Paterson, and M. J. Kushner, “Role of
     neutral transport in aspect ratio dependent plasma etching of three-dimensional
     features,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 35, no. 5, p. 05C301, 2017.

[105] S. Huang, S. Shim, S. K. Nam, and M. J. Kushner, “Pattern dependent profile
     distortion during plasma etching of high aspect ratio features in sio2,” J. Vac. Sci.
     Technol. A, vol. 38, no. 2, p. 023001, 2020.

[106] Y. G. Yook, H. S. You, J. H. Park, W. S. Chang, D. C. Kwon, J. S. Yoon, K. H.
     Yoon, S. S. Shin, D. H. Yu, and Y. H. Im, “Fast and realistic 3d feature profile
     simulation platform for plasma etching process,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 55,
     no. 25, p. 255202, 2022.

[107] D. J. Dixit, S. O’Mullane, S. Sunkoju, A. Gottipati, E. R. Hosler, V. K. Kamineni,
     M. E. Preil, N. Keller, J. Race, G. R. Muthinti, and A. C. Diebold, “Sensitivity anal-
     ysis and line edge roughness determination of 28-nm pitch silicon fins using Mueller
     matrix spectroscopic ellipsometry-based optical critical dimension metrology,” Jour-
     nal of Micro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS, vol. 14, no. 3, p. 031208, 2015.

[108] T. A. Weber and F. H. Stillinger, “Dynamical branching during fluorination of the
     dimerized si(100) surface: A molecular dynamics study,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 92,
     no. 10, pp. 6239–6245, 1990.
Bibliography                                                                           150

[109] S. Hamaguchi and H. Ohta, “Surface molecular dynamics of Si/SiO2 reactive ion
     etching,” Vacuum, vol. 66, pp. 189–195, 08 2002.

[110] S. Hamaguchi, H. Ohta, and H. Yamada, “On interatomic potential functions for
     molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of plasma-wall interactions,” J. Plasma Fu-
     sion Res. SERIES, vol. 6, pp. 80–83, 2004.

[111] H. Yamada and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular-dynamics simulations of organic polymer
     etching by hydrocarbon beams,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 96, no. 11, pp. 6147–6152, 2004.

[112] M. Taguchi and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics study on ar ion bombardment
     effects in amorphous SiO2 deposition processes,” J. Appl. Phys, vol. 100, no. 12,
     p. 123305, 2006.

[113] T. Kawase and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulation analyses on injec-
     tion angle dependence of sio2 sputtering yields by fluorocarbon beams,” Thin Solid
     Films, vol. 515, no. 12, pp. 4883–4886, 2007. The Third International Symposium
     on Dry Process (DPS 2005).

[114] M. Taguchi and S. Hamaguchi, “Md simulations of amorphous sio2 thin film forma-
     tion in reactive sputtering deposition processes,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 515, no. 12,
     pp. 4879–4882, 2007. The Third International Symposium on Dry Process (DPS
     2005).

[115] E. J. C. Tinacba, T. Ito, K. Karahashi, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular
     dynamics simulation for reactive ion etching of Si and SiO2 by SF+
                                                                      5 ions,” J. Vac.

     Sci. Technol. B, vol. 39, no. 4, p. 043203, 2021.

[116] N. A. Mauchamp and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynamics simulation of si trench
     etching with sio2 hard masks,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 40, no. 5, p. 053004,
     2022.
Bibliography                                                                          151

[117] C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, “Molecular dynam-
     ics simulation of oxide-nitride bilayer etching with energetic fluorocarbon ions,” J.
     Vac. Sci. Technol. A., vol. 40, no. 6, p. 063006, 2022.

[118] K. Ishikawa, K. Karahashi, H. Tsuboi, K. Yanai, and M. Nakamura, “Transitional
     change to amorphous fluorinated carbon film deposition under energetic irradiation
     of mass-analyzed carbon monofluoride ions on silicon dioxide surfaces,” J. Vac. Sci.
     Technol. A., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. L1–L3, 2003.

[119] K. Karahashi, K. Yanai, K. Ishikawa, H. Tsuboi, K. Kurihara, and M. Nakamura,
     “Etching yield of SiO2 irradiated by F+ , CFx + (x=1,2,3) ion with energies from 250
     to 2000 eV,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1166–1168, 2004.

[120] K. Yanai, K. Karahashi, K. Ishikawa, and M. Nakamura, “Mass-analyzed CFx +
     (x=1,2,3) ion beam study on selectivity of SiO2 -to-SiN etching and a-C:F film de-
     position,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 97, no. 5, p. 53302, 2005.

[121] T. Ito, K. Karahashi, M. Fukasawa, T. Tatsumi, and S. Hamaguchi, “Hydrogen
     effects in hydrofluorocarbon plasma etching of silicon nitride: Beam study with
     CF+ , CF2 + , CHF2 + , and CH2 F+ ions,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 29, p. 050601,
     7 2011.

[122] K. Karahashi, H. Li, K. Yamada, T. Ito, S. Numazawa, K. Machida, K. Ishikawa,
     and S. Hamaguchi, “Etching yields and surface reactions of amorphous carbon by
     fluorocarbon ion irradiation,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 56, p. 06HB09, may 2017.

[123] J. Biersack and L. Haggmark, “A monte carlo computer program for the transport
     of energetic ions in amorphous targets,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods, vol. 174, no. 1,
     pp. 257–269, 1980.

[124] J. F. Ziegler and J. P. Biersack, The Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter, pp. 93–
     129. Boston, MA: Springer US, 1985.
Bibliography                                                                         152

[125] J. Biersack, S. Berg, and C. Nender, “T-dyn monte carlo simulations applied to ion
     assisted thin film processes,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B: Beam Interac-
     tions with Materials and Atoms, vol. 59-60, pp. 21–27, 1991.

[126] J. F. Ziegler, Handbook of Ion Implantation Technology.       Amsterdam: North-
     Holland, 1992.

[127] D. C. Rapaport, The Art of Molecular Dynamics Simulation. Cambridge University
     Press, 2nd ed., 2004.

[128] C. F. Abrams and D. B. Graves, “On the active surface layer in CFx + etching of
     Si: Atomistic simulation and a simple mass balance model,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol.
     A, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 411–416, 2000.

[129] V. V. Smirnov, A. V. Stengach, K. G. Gaynullin, V. A. Pavlovsky, S. Rauf, P. Stout,
     and P. L. G. Ventzek, “Molecular-dynamics model of energetic fluorocarbon-ion
     bombardment on SiO2 . II. CFx + (x=1, 2, 3) ion etch characterization,” J. Appl.
     Phys., vol. 97, p. 093303, 4 2005.

[130] S. Rauf, T. Sparks, P. L. G. Ventzek, V. V. Smirnov, A. V. Stengach, K. G.
     Gaynullin, and V. A. Pavlovsky, “A molecular dynamics investigation of fluoro-
     carbon based layer-by-layer etching of silicon and SiO2 ,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 101,
     no. 3, p. 33308, 2007.

[131] L. Verlet, “Computer "Experiments" on Classical Fluids. I. Thermodynamical Prop-
     erties of Lennard-Jones Molecules,” Phys. Rev., vol. 159, pp. 98–103, 7 1967.

[132] W. C. Swope, H. C. Andersen, P. H. Berens, and K. R. Wilson, “A computer
     simulation method for the calculation of equilibrium constants for the formation
     of physical clusters of molecules: Application to small water clusters,” J. Chem.
     Phys., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 637–649, 1982.
Bibliography                                                                           153

[133] H. Toyoda, H. Morishima, R. Fukute, Y. Hori, I. Murakami, and H. Sugai, “Beam
     study of the Si and SiO2 etching processes by energetic fluorocarbon ions,” J. Appl.
     Phys., vol. 95, pp. 5172–5179, 4 2004.

[134] Bond Energies, pp. 442–445. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006.

[135] T. Ito, K. Karahashi, S.-Y. Kang, and S. Hamaguchi, “Evaluation of si etching yields
     by cl+ br+ and hbr+ ion irradiation,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser., vol. 232, p. 012021, jun
     2010.

[136] S. Tachi and S. Okudaira, “Chemical sputtering of silicon by f+, cl+, and br+ ions:
     Reactive spot model for reactive ion etching,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, vol. 4, no. 2,
     pp. 459–467, 1986.

[137] Y. Kim, S. Lee, T. Jung, B. Lee, N. Kwak, and S. Park, “Challenges in high-aspect
     ratio contact (HARC) etching for DRAM capacitor formation,” in Advanced Etch
     Technology for Nanopatterning IV (Q. Lin, S. U. Engelmann, and Y. Zhang, eds.),
     vol. 9428, pp. 9–14, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2015.

[138] S. Park, J. Lee, J. Jang, J. K. Lim, H. Kim, J. J. Shim, M. tai Yu, J.-K. Kang,
     S. J. Ahn, and J. Song, “Highly-reliable cell characteristics with 128-layer single-
     stack 3d-nand flash memory,” in 2021 Symposium on VLSI Technology Digest of
     Technical Papers, pp. T8–3, 2021.

[139] N. Ikegami, A. Yabata, T. Matsui, J. Kanamori, and Y. Horiike, “Characteristics of
     very high-aspect-ratio contact hole etching,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 36, pp. 2470–
     2476, Apr 1997.

[140] S. Huang, C. Huard, S. Shim, S. K. Nam, I.-C. Song, S. Lu, and M. J. Kushner,
     “Plasma etching of high aspect ratio features in sio2 using ar/c4f8/o2 mixtures: A
     computational investigation,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A., vol. 37, no. 3, p. 031304,
     2019.
Bibliography                                                                        154

[141] A. Stukowski, “Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO-
     the Open Visualization Tool,” Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., vol. 18, JAN 2010.

[142] S. Hamaguchi and M. Dalvie, “Intrinsic and passivation-induced trench tapering
     during plasma etching,” J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 141, p. 1964, jul 1994.
Research Achievements


Publications

– Doctoral Degree –


  • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dy-
    namics Simulation of Oxide-Nitride Bilayer Etching with Energetic Fluorocarbon
    Ions, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 40 063006 (2022).

  • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Inert-gas Ion
    Scattering at Grazing Angle Incidence on Si and SiO2 Surfaces, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.
    A (2023). to appear

  • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Study of
    SiO2 Nano-hole Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A (2023).
    to appear

  • C. M. D. Cagomoc, S. Taira, M. Isobe, T. Ito, K. Karahashi, L. Belau, E. A.
    Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Oxide and Nitride
    Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ , (to be submitted).


– Master’s Degree –


  • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, and S. Hamaguchi, Atomic-Scale Numerical Sim-
    ulation of a Nanometer-Scale Hole Etching of SiO2 with a Carbon Mask, in the
                                         155
Research Achievements                                                            156

     proceedings of Japan Society of Applied Physics / Silicon Technology Subcommit-
     tee 215th Meeting, pp. 25-27 (2019).


– Bachelor’s Degree –


   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. J. D. De Leon, A. S. M. Ebuen, M. N. R. Gilos, and
     M. R. Vasquez Jr., RF Plasma Cleaning of Silicon Substrates with High-Density
     Polyethylene Contamination, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 57, 01AB04 1-5 (2017).

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, and M. R. Vasquez Jr., Enhanced Chromium Adsorption
     Capacity via Plasma Modification of Natural Zeolites, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 56,
     01AF02 1–4 (2016).




Conferences (International and Local)

– Doctoral Degree –


   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, S. Taira, M. Isobe, T. Ito, K. Karahashi, L. Belau, E. A.
     Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Oxide and Nitride
     Etching by CF3 + and Cl+ , American Vacuum Society 68th International Symposium
     & Exhibition, David L. Lawrence Convention Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
     USA, November 2022.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dy-
     namics Simulation of Oxide-Nitride Stacked Layer Etching by Energetic Fluorocar-
     bon Ions, 65th Annual SVC Technical Conference, Long Beach Convention Center,
     Long Beach, California, USA, May 2-5, 2022.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dy-
     namics Simulation of Oxide-Nitride Layer Etching by Fluorocarbon Plasmas, Amer-
     ican Vacuum Society 67th Virtual Symposium, October 2021 (presented online).
Research Achievements                                                              157

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dy-
     namics Study of Oxide-Nitride Etching by CF3 + Ions, 82nd Japan Society of Applied
     Physics Autumn Meeting, September 2021 (presented online).

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, E. A. Hudson, and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dy-
     namics Study of Ion Scattering on Silicon and Silicon Dioxide, 23rd Symposium on
     Application of Plasma Process SAPP XXIII, February 2021 (presented online).


– Master’s Degree –


   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simulation
     of SiO2 Etching with Fluorocarbon Ions and Radicals, Joint Conference of XXXIV
     International Conference on Phenomena in Ionized Gases and the 10th International
     Conference on Reactive Plasmas, Hokkaido, Japan, July 2019.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simula-
     tion: Nanometer-scale Hole Etching of SiO2 with Carbon Mask, 24th International
     Symposium on Plasma Chemistry, Naples, Italy, June 2019.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simula-
     tion of SiO2 Etching by Energetic Fluorcarbon Ions, 66th Japan Society of Applied
     Physics Spring Meeting, Tokyo, March 2019.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe and S. Hamaguchi, Atomic-Scale Numerical Simu-
     lation of a Nanometer-Scale Hole Etching of SiO2 with a Carbon Mask, Japan So-
     ciety of Applied Physics / Silicon Technology Subcommittee 215th Meeting, Tokyo,
     February 2019. [invited speaker]

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, K. Karahashi, T. Hirohashi, J. Hashimoto, M.
     Omura, H. Hayashi and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Nanometer-
     scale Hole Etching of SiO2 with Carbon Masks, 40th International Symposium on
     Dry Process, Nagoya, Japan, November 2018.
Research Achievements                                                             158

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe and S. Hamaguchi, Atomic-Scale Numerical Simu-
     lation of a Nanometer-Scale Hole Etching of SiO2 with a Carbon Mask, 65th Inter-
     national Symposium Exhibition, California, USA, October 2018.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe, K. Karahashi, T. Hirohashi, J. Hashimoto, M.
     Omura, H. Hayashi and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Hole
     Etching in SiO2 by Energetic Fluorocarbon Ion Injection, 79th Japan Society of
     Applied Physics Autumn Meeting, Nagoya, September 2018.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, M. Isobe and S. Hamaguchi, Molecular Dynamics Simulation
     of Nanometer-Scale Hole Etching, 7th International Conference on Microelectronics
     and Plasma Technology, Incheon, South Korea, July 2018.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, and M. R. Vasquez Jr., Surface Conditioning via RF Plasma
     Irradiation of Natural Zeolite for Chromium Adsorption, 10th EU-Japan Joint Sym-
     posium on Plasma Processing, Okinawa, Japan, December 2017.


– Bachelor’s Degree –


   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, and M. R. Vasquez Jr., Enhanced Chromium Adsorption
     Capacity via Plasma Modification of Natural Zeolites, 8th International Symposium
     on Advanced Plasma Science and its Application for Nitrides and Nanomaterials,
     Nagoya, Japan, March 2016.

   • C. M. D. Cagomoc, and M. R. Vasquez Jr., Plasma Modification of Natural Zeo-
     lite for Chromium Adsorption, 1st International Symposium of the Vacuum Society
     of the Philippines, Quezon City, Philippines, January 2016.
Research Achievements                                                           159

Awards

– Doctoral Degree –


   • Finalist of the 2022 Coburn and Winters (C&W) Student Award in Plasma
     Science and Technology Division (PSTD) of the American Vacuum Society (AVS)

   • Recipient of the 2022 Encouragement Prize (second half) by the Association
     for the Advancement of Manufacturing & Technology

   • Recipient of the Student Sponsorship Program by the Society of Vacuum
     Coaters (May 2022)

   • Recipient of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Research
     Fellowship for Young Scientists (April 2020 – March 2023)

   • Recipient of the Japanese Government Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
     Science and Technology (MEXT) Scholarship (declined)


– Master’s Degree –


   • Recipient of the Best Poster Award at the 7th International Conference on
     Microelectronics and Plasma Technology, Incheon, South Korea (July 2018)

   • Recipient of the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) Innovative Asia
     Scholarship (October 2017 – September 2019).
