             micromachines

Article
One-Step Dry-Etching Fabrication of Tunable Two-Hierarchical
Nanostructures
Xu Ji 1 , Bo Wang 1 , Zhongshan Zhang 1 , Yuan Xiang 1,2 , Haifang Yang 1 , Ruhao Pan 1, *                           and Junjie Li 1,2, *

                                         1   Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
                                             Beijing 100190, China; jixu@iphy.ac.cn (X.J.); wangbo2014@iphy.ac.cn (B.W.); zhangzs@iphy.ac.cn (Z.Z.);
                                             xiangyuan@iphy.ac.cn (Y.X.); hfyang@iphy.ac.cn (H.Y.)
                                         2   CAS Key Laboratory of Vacuum Physics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
                                         *   Correspondence: panruhao@iphy.ac.cn (R.P.); jjli@iphy.ac.cn (J.L.)


                                         Abstract: Two-hierarchical nanostructures, characterized by two distinct configurations along the
                                         height direction, exhibit immense potential for applications in various fields due to their significantly
                                         enhanced controllable degree compared to single-order structures. However, due to the limitations
                                         imposed by planar technology, the realization of two-hierarchical nanostructures encounters huge
                                         challenges. In this work, we developed a one-step etching method based on inductively coupled
                                         plasma reactive ion etching for two-hierarchical nanostructures. Thanks to the shrinking effect of the
                                         Cr mask and the generation of a passivation layer during etching, the target materials experienced two
                                         different states from vertical etching to shrink etching. Consequently, the achieved two-hierarchical
                                         nanostructure configuration features a cross-section of an upper triangle and a lower rectangle,
                                         showing higher controllable degrees compared to the one-order ones. Both the mask pattern and
                                         etching parameters play crucial roles, by which two-hierarchical structures with diversiform shapes
                                         can be constructed controllably. This method for two-hierarchical nanostructures offers advantages
                                         including excellent control over structural properties, high processing efficiency, uniformity across
                                         large areas, and universality in materials. This developed strategy not only presents a simple and
                                         rapid nanofabrication platform for realizing optoelectronic devices, but also provides innovative
                                         ideas for designing the next generation of high-performance devices.

Citation: Ji, X.; Wang, B.; Zhang, Z.;   Keywords: two-hierarchical nanostructures; nanofabrication platform; one-step etching; inductively
Xiang, Y.; Yang, H.; Pan, R.; Li, J.     coupled plasma reactive ion etching; high controllable degrees
One-Step Dry-Etching Fabrication of
Tunable Two-Hierarchical
Nanostructures. Micromachines 2024,
15, 1160. https://doi.org/10.3390/       1. Introduction
mi15091160
                                               Compared to nanostructures, two-hierarchical nanostructures, which show two dis-
Academic Editor: Parsian K. Mohseni      tinct shapes along the cross-section of the height direction, possess much higher controllable
                                         degrees of freedom and thus can be used in a series of high-performance devices, including
Received: 30 August 2024
                                         optical metasurfaces, anti-reflection elements, photon emitters, and probes, and thus pave
Revised: 14 September 2024
Accepted: 15 September 2024
                                         a fresh strategy for the next generation of optoelectronic and measurement instruments.
Published: 17 September 2024
                                         For instance, anti-reflection devices can suppress the reflected light signal of a surface, and
                                         can be potentially applied in radars, optical invisible cloaks, solar cells, etc. [1,2]. Addi-
                                         tionally, anti-reflection devices that consist of two-hierarchical nanostructures can realize
                                         higher efficiency and a wider operating band, showing significant advancements in many
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.        fields [3–5]. Meanwhile, the photon emitter that relies on the two-hierarchical nanostruc-
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       ture configuration can be used in quantum devices, field emission cathodes, and other
This article is an open access article   important devices [6,7]. Despite the advantages, the difficulties in fabrication severely limit
distributed under the terms and          the practical application of two-hierarchical nanostructures, because the configuration shift
conditions of the Creative Commons       along the z-axis is beyond the capacity of traditional planar art. Thus, a new fabrication
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    method for two-hierarchical nanostructure blocks at the nanoscale is urgently needed for
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         the further development of next-generation micro-/nano-devices.
4.0/).




Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi15091160                                       https://www.mdpi.com/journal/micromachines
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                         2 of 10



                                     The great advantages of two-hierarchical nanostructures have attracted the interest of
                               researchers, and they focus on the fabrication of the nanostructures and have developed
                               many techniques. These methods concentrate on solving the problems faced by fabricating
                               two-hierarchical nanostructures, such as large-area construction, nanoscale fabrication, and
                               high spatial controllability. The direct 3D fabrication methods were first considered, and
                               these methods provide a method for 3D structures with arbitrary shapes. However, the
                               corresponding method cannot achieve two-hierarchical nanostructures with high precision
                               and a large area, and the 3D print method has no capacity to process structures at the
                               nanoscale. Three-dimensional laser direct writing based on two-photon absorption can be
                               applied in the nanostructures of several hundred nanometers, but the applicable materials
                               and processing speed do not meet the need of practical devices [8–10]. Focused ion beam
                               (FIB)-induced deposition is a special 3D printing method that can build up structures
                               at the nanoscale, but this approach cannot be used in large-area preparations because
                               its point-to-point fabrication regime results in a very low fabricating efficiency [11–13].
                               Nowadays, two-hierarchical nanostructures are mostly fabricated by adjusting the planar
                               methods, which include lithography, deposition, and etching. Wet etching is a process in
                               which a sample is immersed in a certain chemical reagent, and the materials not covered
                               by the mask can be removed through a chemical reaction. Complex 3D structures can be
                               achieved through wet etching, but there are disadvantages, such as the slow etching rate,
                               poor spatial controllability, and serious chemical pollution [14–16]. The templated electro-
                               chemical deposition (ECD) method is also suitable for the fabrication of two-hierarchical
                               nanostructures based on the overgrowth effect. However, this method can only be used to
                               fabricate metallic configurations, and the need of a conductive layer limits the fabrication
                               of structures on dielectric substrates [17]. Thus, a one-step, high-productivity method for
                               the fabrication of two-hierarchical nanostructures with great precision is urgently needed
                               to overcome the bottlenecks of the other relative methods and push the applications of the
                               two-hierarchical configurations to a new stage.
                                     Here, we developed and experimentally demonstrated a two-hierarchical nanostruc-
                               ture fabrication method based on one-step inductively coupled plasma (ICP) reactive ion
                               etching. Due to the mask deformation and the generation of a passivation layer during
                               the etching process, two distinct kinds of etching phenomenon, namely, vertical etching
                               and shrink etching, can be observed, and thus the output structures show a cross-section
                               with an upper triangle and a bottom rectangle. Two-hierarchical nanostructures built by
                               this technology show arbitrary patterns such as nanogratings and polygons by adjusting
                               mask patterns and etching parameters. This method has a simple processing flow and
                               all the technologies used in this approach meet the needs of large-area preparation. The
                               minimum distance between structures can reach 10 nm, and the minimum cone radius
                               of triangles can also reach 10 nm. Additionally, the structure height, linewidth, period,
                               and other parameters can be tuned within a large range, with one-step molding, and no
                               complex processing steps are required. The two-hierarchical nanostructure processing
                               method in this experiment can achieve a breakthrough in dimensions and provide new
                               ideas for the research and development of nanodevices in optical and electrical fields.

                               2. Methods
                                     Firstly, TiO2 with a thickness of 800 nm was deposited on a silicon wafer by electron
                               beam deposition (EBD, FU-12PEB-500, Taiwan, China). Then, Cr with a thickness of 60 nm
                               was deposited on TiO2 by EBD as the mask layer with a thickness precision of 3%. After
                               that, an e-beam resist (AR-P 6200.13, Berlin, Germany) was spin-coated on the wafer and
                               baked at 150 ◦ C for 1 min to obtain a 300 nm thick film. The resist was prepatterned by
                               electron beam lithography (EBL, Raith EBPG 5200, Dortmund, Germany) and developed
                               by immersing it in the developer (AR-600-546, Berlin, Germany) for 1 min and the stopper
                               (DI water) for 30 s, and thus, the resist mask was obtained. The Cr mask was then achieved
                               by the pattern transfer process utilizing an ICP (LEUVEN Heverlee Poshow A) system. The
                               etching parameters were set to an ICP power of 400 W and RF power of 40 W; the gas flows
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                              3 of 10



                               were fixed at Cl2 80 sccm and O2 20 sccm; and the chamber pressure was set to 10 mTorr.
                               The residual photoresist was then removed using RIE. Finally, the TiO2 was etched using
                               ICP, which can directly etch two-hierarchical nanostructures with a triangular upper layer
                               and a rectangular lower layer. The process parameters were ICP power of 350 W and RF
                               power of 120 W; the gas flows were fixed at SF6 40 sccm, CHF3 10 sccm, and O2 5 sccm; and
                               the chamber pressure was set to 10 mTorr. The TiO2 was then etched under a temperature
                               of 40 ◦ C. All the gases with a purity of 99.999% used in this work were purchased from
                               Minxing Gas Ltd., Maoming, China.

                               3. Results and Discussion
                                    The fabrication of the two-hierarchical nanostructures is schematically shown in
                               Figure 1a. A clean Si wafer is chosen for the substrate, and 800 nm TiO2 is deposited
                               on the substrate. Here, TiO2 is selected for its excellent optical properties. A Cr layer
                               with a thickness of 60 nm is further deposited as the metallic mask. Then, the mask is
                               patterned by the EBL and ICP. The two-hierarchical nanostructures then take the shape
                               followed by the ICP. In this process, the two-hierarchical nanostructures can be achieved
                               by a one-step etching at the nanoscale for shrinking of the mask and the generation of the
                               passivation layer. Namely, the target materials experienced two different states, which
                               are vertical etching and shrink etching, respectively. Consequently, the achieved two-
                               hierarchical nanostructure configuration features a cross-section of an upper triangle and a
                               lower rectangle. Figure 1b clearly shows the shape evolution of the TiO2 nanostructures
                               during the ICP etching. A nanograting with a 300 nm pitch and 200 nm critical dimension
                               (CD) is chosen as the test structure. By optimizing the etching parameters, at the start of the
                               etching, the vertical etching takes dominance, and the edges of the mask become a rounder
                               corner, as the left column depicts. With the increase in time, the shrink etching at the top
                               and the passivation layer generation at the bottom can be observed. The TiO2 nanograting
                               begins to show a two-hierarchical morphology, where the top pattern is a trapezoid while
                               the bottom pattern is a rectangle (middle column of Figure 1b). The shrink etching comes
                               from the linewidth decrease of the Cr mask, and the passivation layer results in a narrower
                               gap between the stripes. With continuous etching, as the right column demonstrates, the
                               mask is finally removed, and the two-hierarchical configurations are built up with a triangle
                               and a rectangle shape cross-section. In order to reveal the basic mechanism of the one-step
                               etching in constructing two-hierarchical nanostructures, the etching process is investigated
                               in detail and depicted in Figure 2. There are three phenomena that can be found, namely,
                               dissociation, passivation, and sputtering, in which dissociation refers to the reactive gas
                               transfer to radicals:
                                                                e− + SF6 → F* + SF5 * + e−                                    (1)
                                                                       e− + O2 → 2O*                                          (2)
                                                               e− + CHF3 → H * + CF3 * + e−                                   (3)
                               where SF6 , O2 , and CHF3 are reactive gases, and F*, SF5 *, O*, CF3 *, and H* are radicals.
                                   The passivation process can be defined as:

                                                            TiO2 + 4F* + 4H * → TiF4 + 2H2 O                                  (4)

                                    In this process, TiF4 , which is a type of stable solid, is generated as the passivation
                               layer that can protect the nanogratings from being etched. Finally, the sputtering process is
                               as follows:
                                                               e− + SF6 → F* + SF5 + + e−                                 (5)
                                                              e− + CHF3 → H + + CF3 − + e−                                    (6)
                                    SF5 + and CF3 − refer to different kinds of ion that can be used for the sputtering of TiO2 .
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                                     4 of 10




                               Figure 1. (a) Process flow diagram for two-hierarchical nanostructure preparation. (b) With increasing
                               time, the evolution of the morphology of this two-hierarchical nanostructure. Scale bar: 600 nm.




                               Figure 2. One-step etching fabricating mechanism of two-hierarchical nanostructures. (a) The process
                               of two-hierarchical nanostructure formation through the action of CHF3 and SF6 plasma in the etching
                               process. (b) At the beginning of etching, TiO2 is etched into vertical gratings. (c) With the increase in
                               etching time, the Cr mask gradually narrows due to shrink etching, and the TiO2 gradually forms
                               two-hierarchical nanostructures with a trapezoid on the top and rectangle on the bottom. (d) When
                               the Cr mask shrink etching is completed, TiO2 two-hierarchical nanostructures with a triangular
                               upper section and a rectangular lower section are formed. Scale bar: 400 nm.

                                   Figure 2 shows the mechanism of the two-hierarchical nanostructure etching process.
                               Figure 2a shows the process of two-hierarchical nanostructure formation through the action
                               of CHF3 and SF6 plasma in the etching process. As shown in Figure 2b, at the beginning of
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                          5 of 10



                               etching, TiO2 is etched into a vertical grating. The surface of TiO2 reacts with F* radicals
                               to form a TiF4 passivation layer. As the equations show, the reactive gas is dissociated to
                               kinds of fluoro-based radicals (Equations (1)–(3)). When radicals randomly impact the
                               surface of TiO2 , the material reacts with F* radicals to form a TiF4 passivation layer on
                               the surface, including the side wall and bottom of the nanostructures (Equation (4)). The
                               chemical properties of TiF4 are stable and it is more difficult to remove compared to TiO2 .
                               As for the sputtering, as depicted in Equations (5) and (6), SF5 + and CF3 − are generated
                               and etch both TiO2 and TiF4 along the z-axis, simultaneously, while the generated TiF4
                               on the side wall is retained, which results in the gap between the nanoribbon becoming
                               narrower with the etching time. Furthermore, the shape deformation of the mask plays
                               another key role in the construction of two-hierarchical nanostructures. One can clearly
                               see from Figure 2c that the linewidth of the Cr mask becomes smaller due to the lateral
                               etching of the plasma when the etching depth of the TiO2 reaches 300 nm. Consequently,
                               a shrink etching effect can be observed, and the shape of the grating shows a narrower
                               linewidth at the top. When the passivation layer generation and the mask deformation
                               happen synchronously in this etching step, the height of the grating is higher and the gap
                               between structures becomes smaller for the continuous etching along the z-axis and the
                               passivation layer generation, but the top of the nanograting demonstrates a trapezoid shape
                               due to the mask deformation. When the Cr mask shrink etching is completed, as shown in
                               Figure 2d, two-hierarchical nanostructures with an upper section of a triangle and a lower
                               section of a rectangle are finally built up.
                                    After the physical mechanism of fabricating two-hierarchical nanostructures is re-
                               vealed, the etching parameters are investigated with the purpose of modulating the con-
                               figuration of the two-hierarchical nanograting. Here, to ensure the gases react adequately,
                               the ratio of the reactive gas flows is firstly optimized via an experiment. The basic etching
                               parameters are ICP power of 350 W and RF power of 120 W; the gas flows are fixed at SF6
                               40 sccm, CHF3 10 sccm, and O2 5 sccm; the chamber pressure is set to 10 mTorr; and the
                               TiO2 is then etched under a temperature 40 ◦ C. Firstly, the ICP power versus the morphol-
                               ogy of the nanograting is obtained and shown in Figure 3a, where six samples are etched
                               under the same etching conditions but with different ICP power levels. With the ICP power
                               increasing from 250 W to 1000 W, the transverse etching at the side wall of the gratings
                               becomes obvious as the ICP power gradually increases because the plasma concentration
                               increases due to the large ICP power. When the TiO2 is etched under a low ICP power,
                               the cross-section of the nanograting shows a triangle top pattern and a rectangle bottom
                               pattern, and the change in the triangle decreases with the gradual increase in the ICP power.
                               As the ICP power reaches 500 W, the nanostructures become a vertical grating. With the
                               power continuing to increase, the plasma concentration is denser, the top pattern of the
                               grating shows a rectangle shape, and the bottom one is a trapezoid, indicating that one
                               can flexibly tune the top and bottom sections by the ICP power. We further concentrate
                               on the structures obtained by an ICP power of 350 W, but change the RF power from 90 W
                               to 240 W. As Figure 3b shows, as the RF power increases, the gap between the gratings
                               becomes smaller. During this process, more TiF4 is sputtered out and accumulates at the
                               bottom, and as the TiF4 increases, the position where the plasma etching narrows, so the
                               spacing between the cell structures narrows. Figure 3(b1–b3) show the change in the basic
                               parameters, which include the height of the triangle of the upper section, the radius of
                               the top corner of the triangle, and the gap between the structures of the two-hierarchical
                               nanostructure morphology with the RF. Figure 3(b1) shows the height of the top triangle
                               versus the RF power, indicating that the height increases with the RF power, reaches a
                               maximum of 350 nm under a 180 W RF power, and becomes stable with the continuous
                               increase in the power. The radius of the top corner of the triangle is demonstrated in
                               Figure 3(b2). A decreasing trend is observed with the RF power, meaning that the top edge
                               of the nanostructures becomes sharper with the RF power. The minimum cone radius is
                               10 nm. Notably, the generated rate of TiF4 , which defines the gap between the structures, is
                               a function of the RF power. A higher RF power usually results in a thicker passivation layer
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                                   6 of 10



                               and results in a decrease in the gap width (Figure 3(b3)), and a minimum gap of 10 nm
                               can be obtained for the RF with a power of 210 W (Figure 3(b4)). The gap finally vanishes
                               with the RF increasing to 240 W, with only the upper triangular structure being left and
                               forming a blazed grating. Thanks to the etching temperature, the reactive gas and power
                               are precisely controlled during the etching process, resulting in a negligible error of the
                               constructed structures.




                               Figure 3. (a) Under the condition that only ICP power changes and the other etching conditions
                               remain unchanged, the morphology of the two-hierarchical nanostructures after etching of the same
                               etching mask is affected. (b) Under the condition that only RF power changes and the other etching
                               conditions remain unchanged, the morphology of the two-hierarchical nanostructures after etching
                               of the same etching mask is affected: (b1–b3) the change in the main structural parameters of the
                               two-hierarchical nanostructure morphology when RF power varies, including the height of the upper
                               triangle (h), the radius of the top corner of the triangle (r), and the gap between the structures (g);
                               (b4) the minimum gap between cell structures is 10 nm. Scale bar: 600 nm.

                                    The impact of the gap between the two-hierarchical structures on the morphology
                               is further investigated. A series of two-hierarchical nanostructures with a consistent CD
                               of 200 nm, with gaps of 750 nm, 530 nm, 350 nm, 100 nm, and 70 nm, are designed
                               and fabricated. Figure 4a–e summarize the key parameters of the nanostructures on the
                               scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image, i.e., the height of the upper triangle (h1 ) and
                               the lower rectangle (h2 ), the angle of the upper triangle (θ), and the width (L). The results
                               are the counts shown in Figure 4f. When the gaps are greater than 100 nm, with the
                               gaps decreasing, h1 , h2 , θ, and L remain stable. It can be concluded that when the gaps
                               exceed 100 nm, changes in the gaps have no effect on the two-hierarchical nanostructures’
                               morphology. However, when the gaps are smaller than 100 nm, h1 , h2 , and θ have large
                               changes, and only L remains stable. At this time, the gaps have a greater impact on the
                               preparation of the two-hierarchical nanostructures, because the gaps between the unit
                               structures are too small, resulting in a smaller etching area during the etching process,
                               thus causing the etching rate to become faster. When the etching reaches a similar depth,
                               the triangular structure at the upper end of the two-hierarchical nanostructures has not
                               been etched to a sharp cone, leading to a decrease in h1 , and an increase in h2 and θ. The
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                                      7 of 10



                               unchanged value of L indicates that the gaps of the two-hierarchical nanostructures in this
                               etching process have no effect on the width of the unit structure. The above-mentioned
                               laws enable one to fabricate two-hierarchical nanostructures on demand, which is very
                               helpful for the design of devices with two-hierarchical nanostructures.




                               Figure 4. With the same design linewidth, but a different spacing mask, the morphology of the
                               two-hierarchical nanostructures changes under the same etching conditions. (a–e) Structural features
                               and key parameters of two-hierarchical nanostructures marked on the SEM image. (f) Variation
                               trend of key structural parameters with the structural gap regulation, namely, height of the upper
                               triangle (h1 ), height of the lower rectangle (h2 ), angle of the upper triangle (θ), and width (L). Scale
                               bar: 600 nm.

                                     The etching of two-hierarchical nanostructures is independent of the direction of
                               the mask, making it possible to build up nano-configurations with diversiform shapes.
                               The etching process was extended from gratings to more intricate array structures. We
                               designed a series of planar patterns to verify the manufacturing capabilities of structures
                               with a sufficient spatial degree. Figure 5a–f show the design drawings of squares, triangles,
                               circles, multi-circles, crosses, and hexagons, and their SEM images after etching, where
                               the structures show great consistency between each other. All the structures show a sharp
                               top layer and a bottom layer with steep side walls, indicating that the method has the
                               feasibility of processing more complex three-dimensional structures. Furthermore, the
                               enlarged views of the side walls of different shapes indicate a smooth surface, showing the
                               high-quality etching capacity of the developed method. This process not only presents a
                               novel fabrication platform for realizing optoelectronic devices at the nanoscale, but also
                               provides innovative ideas for designing the next generation of high-performance devices.
                                     Most importantly, the one-step etching process of two-hierarchical nanostructures
                               can be expanded to a series of materials because the generation of a passivation layer and
                               the shrinking of the mask pattern are not affected by the target materials. Here, Si-based
                               materials including c-Si, α-Si, SiNx , and SiO2 , which play crucial roles in both electronic
                               and photonics devices, are introduced to show the material universality of the developed
                               method. Figure 6 demonstrates the two-hierarchical nanostructure etching by the one-step
                               etching method. The masks are Cr, the linewidth is 200 nm, and the period is 300 nm. All
                               materials are etched under the parameters of ICP power 350 W and RF power 120 W; the
                               gas flows are fixed at SF6 40 sccm, CHF3 10 sccm, and O2 5 sccm; the chamber pressure is set
                               to 10 mTorr; and the temperature is 40 ◦ C. It can be found that although the morphologies
                               of the nanostructures are different, a two-hierarchical configuration is clearly observed. The
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                                    8 of 10



                               final etching morphologies of c-Si, SiNx , and SiO2 are similar, while the upper structure of
                               α-Si etching is sharper, which is related to the specific kind of material. This verifies that
                               one-step etching can be applied to abundant suitable materials and can be used in lots of
                               devices with high performance.




                               Figure 5. One-step etching of diversified two-hierarchical nanostructures using different masks. From
                               top to the bottom are the schematic, top, and tilt views of an array of two-hierarchical nanostructures,
                               the detailed SEM images of a single nanostructure and the side walls, and finally a schematic of a
                               unit cell of two-hierarchical nanostructures, where the mask shapes are designed as (a–f) squares,
                               triangles, circles, multi-circles, crosses, and hexagons. Scale bar: 500 nm (second and third rows),
                               300 nm (fourth row), and 200 nm (fifth row).




                               Figure 6. The one-step etching method is suitable for preparing two-hierarchical structures of various
                               materials, such as c-Si, α-Si, SiNx , and SiO2 . Scale bar: 800 nm.
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                                         9 of 10



                                   4. Conclusions
                                         We have proposed a one-step etching method to directly build up two-hierarchical
                                   nanostructures, based on the simultaneous generation of a passivation layer on the side wall
                                   and the shrinking effect of the mask pattern during the etching process. Two-hierarchical
                                   nanostructures comprising a triangle upper layer and a rectangle lower layer are success-
                                   fully constructed, showing that the main feature parameters of the nanostructures, such as
                                   the angle and height of the triangle in the upper layer, and the height and linewidth of the
                                   rectangle in the lower layer, can be tunable over a large range by varying the etching condi-
                                   tions. TiO2 two-hierarchical nanostructure arrays with gaps down to 10 nm and a complex
                                   mask can be fabricated by this method. Moreover, the one-step etching can be expanded to
                                   a series of other materials with important applied value, which ensures the method can be
                                   utilized in high-performance devices that need two-hierarchical nanostructures. This work
                                   provides a new technology strategy for fabricating two-hierarchical nanostructures in the
                                   field of photonic and electronic nanodevices, and further helps the design and realization
                                   of related devices with stronger ability and new functions.

                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.Y., R.P. and J.L.; Data curation, R.P.; Formal analysis,
                                   X.J. and Z.Z.; Funding acquisition, B.W., R.P. and J.L.; Investigation, R.P.; Methodology, X.J. and
                                   B.W.; Project administration, J.L.; Resources, J.L.; Software, Y.X.; Supervision, J.L.; Validation, H.Y.;
                                   Visualization, X.J.; Writing—original draft, X.J.; Writing—review and editing, R.P. and J.L. All authors
                                   have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research was funded by the National Key Research and Development Program of
                                   China (Grant Nos. 2023YFF0715902 and 2023YFF0721901), the National Natural Science Foundation
                                   of China (Grant Nos. 12074420, U21A20140, 12204527, and 12304463), the Chinese Academy of
                                   Sciences through the Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research (YSBR-021). This work is also
                                   supported by the Synergic Extreme Condition User Facility (SECUF), China.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Dataset available on request from the authors.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.    Shanmugam, N.; Pugazhendhi, R.; Elavarasan, R.M.; Kasiviswanathan, P.; Das, N. Anti-Reflective Coating Materials: A Holistic
      Review from Pv Perspective. Energies 2020, 13, 2631. [CrossRef]
2.    Raut, H.K.; Ganesh, V.A.; Nair, A.S.; Ramakrishna, S. Anti-Reflective Coatings: A Critical, in-Depth Review. Energy Environ. Sci.
      2011, 4, 3779–3804. [CrossRef]
3.    Chan, L.W.; Morse, D.E.; Gordon, M.J. Moth Eye-Inspired Anti-Reflective Surfaces for Improved Ir Optical Systems & Visible
      Leds Fabricated with Colloidal Lithography and Etching. Bioinspiration Biomim. 2018, 13, 041001.
4.    Navarro-Baena, I.; Jacobo-Martin, A.; Hernandez, J.J.; Castro Smirnov, J.R.; Viela, F.; Monclus, M.A.; Osorio, M.R.; Molina-
      Aldareguia, J.M.; Rodriguez, I. Single-Imprint Moth-Eye Anti-Reflective and Self-Cleaning Film with Enhanced Resistance.
      Nanoscale 2018, 10, 15496–15504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Peev, D.; Kolev, N.; Sivkov, Y. Stratified Layer Composite Material for Radar Anti-Reflective Coating. In Proceedings of the 2022
      22nd International Symposium on Electrical Apparatus and Technologies (SIELA), Bourgas, Bulgaria, 1–4 June 2022; pp. 1–6.
6.    Qiu, T.; Akinoglu, E.M.; Luo, B.; Konarova, M.; Yun, J.H.; Gentle, I.R.; Wang, L. Nanosphere Lithography: A Versatile Approach
      to Develop Transparent Conductive Films for Optoelectronic Applications. Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, e2103842. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    Chang, L.; Liu, X.; Luo, J.; Lee, C.Y.; Zhang, J.; Fan, X.; Zhang, W. Physiochemical Coupled Dynamic Nanosphere Lithography
      Enabling Multiple Metastructures from Single Mask. Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, e2310469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    An, B.W.; Kim, K.; Lee, H.; Kim, S.Y.; Shim, Y.; Lee, D.Y.; Song, J.Y.; Park, J.U. High-Resolution Printing of 3d Structures Using an
      Electrohydrodynamic Inkjet with Multiple Functional Inks. Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 4322–4328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Shim, J.S.; Kim, J.E.; Jeong, S.H.; Choi, Y.J.; Ryu, J.J. Printing Accuracy, Mechanical Properties, Surface Characteristics, and
      Microbial Adhesion of 3d-Printed Resins with Various Printing Orientations. J. Prosthet. Dent. 2020, 124, 468–475. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
10.   Chae, M.P.; Chung, R.D.; Smith, J.A.; Hunter-Smith, D.J.; Rozen, W.M. The Accuracy of Clinical 3d Printing in Reconstructive
      Surgery: Literature Review and in Vivo Validation Study. Gland. Surg. 2021, 10, 2293–2303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Drezner, Y.; Fishman, D.; Greenzweig, Y.; Raveh, A. Characterization of Damage Induced by Fib Etch and Tungsten Deposition in
      High Aspect Ratio Vias. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Nanotechnol. Microelectron. Mater. Process. Meas. Phenom. 2011, 29, 011026. [CrossRef]
Micromachines 2024, 15, 1160                                                                                                   10 of 10



12.   Shinji, M.; Kaito, T.; Fujita, J.-I.; Komuro, M.; Kanda, K.; Haruyama, Y. Three-Dimensional Nanostructure Fabrication by Focused-
      Ion-Beam Chemical Vapor Deposition. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanometer. Struct. Process. Meas. Phenom. 2000, 18,
      3181–3184.
13.   Wang, Z.M. Fib Nanostructures; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2013.
14.   Huang, H.-C.; Ren, Z.; Chan, C.; Li, X. Wet Etch, Dry Etch, and Macetch of B-Ga2o3: A Review of Characteristics and Mechanism.
      J. Mater. Res. 2021, 36, 4756–4770. [CrossRef]
15.   Zhuang, D.; Edgar, J.H. Wet Etching of Gan, Aln, and Sic: A Review. Mater. Sci. Eng. R Rep. 2005, 48, 1–46. [CrossRef]
16.   Wilke, N.; Mulcahy, A.; Ye, S.R.; Morrissey, A. Process Optimization and Characterization of Silicon Microneedles Fabricated by
      Wet Etch Technology. Microelectron. J. 2005, 36, 650–656. [CrossRef]
17.   Pan, R.; Liu, Q.; Li, G.; Yang, Y.; Geng, G.; Li, C.; Yan, J.; Zhang, Z.; Zhao, H.; Gu, C.; et al. Diversified Plasmonic Metallic
      Nanostructures with High Aspect Ratio Based on Templated Electrochemical Deposition. J. Micromechanics Microengineering 2022,
      32, 054002. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
