1 
 
Autonomous Hybrid Optimization of a SiO2 Plasma Etching Mechanism 
 
Florian Krüger1, Du Zhang2, Pingshan Luan2, Minjoon Park2, Andrew Metz2 and 
Mark J.  Kushner1,3 
1 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of Michigan, 1301 Beal 
Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2122 USA  fkrueger@umich.edu, mjkush@umich.edu 
2 TEL Technology Center, America, LLC,  255 Fuller Road, Suite 214, Albany, NY 12203 USA 
 du.zhang@us.tel.com, pingshan.luan@us.tel.com, minjoon.park@us.tel.com, 
 andrew.metz@us.tel.com 
3 Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. 
 
Abstract: 
Computational modeling of plasma etching processes at the feature scale relevant to the 
fabrication of nanometer semiconductor devices is critically dependent on the reaction mechanism 
representing the physical processes occurring between plasma produced r eactant fluxes and the 
surface, and the reaction probabilities, yields, rate coefficients and threshold energies that charac-
terize those processes.  The increasing complexity of the structures being fabricated, new materials 
and novel gas mixtures for plasma produced radical fluxes to the wafer also increase the complex-
ity of the reaction mechanism used in feature scale models, and the difficulty in developing the 
fundamental data required for the mechanism.  This challenge is further exacerbated by the fac t 
that acquiring these fundamental data through more complex computational models or experiments 
is often limited by cost, technical complexity or inadequate models.  In this paper, we discuss a 
method to automate the selection of fundamental data in a reduced reaction mechanism for feature 
scale plasma etching of  SiO2 using a fluorocarbon gas mixture by matching predictions of etch 
profiles to experimental data using a gradient descent / Nelder-Mead method hybrid optimization 
scheme.  These methods produce a reaction mechanism that replicate s the experimental training 
data as well as experimental data using related but different etch processes. 
 
Keywords: plasma etching, plasma surface interaction, computational modeling, 
model optimization, machine learning, physics informed optimization 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

2 
 
I. Introduction 
The computational modeling of plasma etching processes is receiving new interest due, in 
part, to its ability to aid in the design and understanding of semiconductor device manufacturing 
and to provide the training data for machine learning based optimization of processes [1–5].  In 
simulation of plasma etching, the framework typically includes a reactor scale model and a feature 
scale model [6–8].  The reactor scale model provides reactive fluxes  to the wafer, including their 
energy and angular distributions, that are used as input to the feature scale model  [9][10].  There 
are several classes of feature scale models – level-set-methods [6,11–13], statistical voxel ap-
proaches [14–16], and molecular dynamics (MD) [17,18].  Although MD methods are the most 
fundamental, they are currently computationally limited in the size of the feature that can be sim-
ulated and by availability of inter -particle potentials for complex chemistries.  As a result, most 
full-feature scale capable models employ level set or statistical voxel methods with, in most cases, 
less fundamental reaction mechanisms. 
Due to limits resulting from computational complexity and sometimes incomplete under-
standing of the physical process involved in plasma etching, feature profile simulations typically 
make use of simplified or reduced reaction mechanisms.  These mechanisms use rate coefficients, 
reaction probabilities, threshold energies and energy and angular scaling to represent reactions 
between gas phase and surface species.  The outcome of these reactions are the addition of material 
(deposition), removal of material (e tching or sputtering) and modification of the material (pas-
sivation, implantation) [15,19,20].  The reaction mechanism, and the coefficients and parameters 
that quantify the mechanism, are ideally based on either experiment s or more complex computa-
tional models that do not allow for an efficient real-time evaluation.  
Rapidly and accurately producing reaction mechanisms for profile simulation for novel 
materials, gas mixtures and temperature regimes, as in cryogenic etch processes  [21–23], is chal-
lenging.  This is particularly the case in data starved regimes , which is often the case when ad-
dressing new materials.  So there is a need to robustly and efficiently adjust and improve reaction 
mechanisms.  Classical optimization techniques as well as machine learning (ML) based ap-
proaches are areas of active research [4,5,24–26].   
Developing and a pplying ML techniques for process design is an expanding area of re-
search with the goal of addressing the increasing number of process parameters, complexity of the 
processes and non-linear behavior.  Model-based feedback has enabl ed precise, repeatable and 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

3 
 
stable process control [27–29].  As the control models face some of the same issues with respect 
to data availability and consistency as in profile evolution, control methods are now also based on 
machine learning methods which efficiently allow for rapid real time evaluation [30–34].  Other 
applications of ML include the development of surrogate methods where statistical models are 
trained on experimental or computed data to simulate a process as a whole or a sub-process [35,36].  
Such practices being applied to large scale simulations of fusion plasmas [37–43].  Ideally, these 
models applied in semiconductor manufacturing are capable of reproducing reactor and feature 
scale etch processes either directly as an outcome of the surrogate model or by interpolating be-
tween known results [44,45].  These types of approaches have underlying model structures that 
are typically valid in their training parameter space.  However, the parameters that are the outcome 
of the underlying model, while providing a solution, do not necessarily provide physical insight.  
Many of these data driven ML approaches are themselves fundamentally limited by the availability 
or accuracy of the data used for training purposes.  Producing this data is itself costly and time 
consuming, while the resulting trained ML based model may have limited applicability to process 
conditions outside the training set.  
The challenge of needing large training sets of data has led to the use of physics informed 
ML and optimizations techniques.  Using these techniques, lack of data is, to some degree, miti-
gated by the explicit use of physical formulations and models to reduce the degrees of freedom in 
the ML-derived model.  Using this approach, a reaction mechanism can be built using known 
forms of probabilities of gas-surface interactions which may have poorly known coefficients.  Us-
ing ML-methods to derive the physics-based coefficients should, in principle, produce a reaction 
mechanism that extends beyond the conditions of the training set.  
These challenges specifically apply to the modeling of high aspect ratio (HAR) plasma 
etch processes [46–49].  The aspect ratio (AR) is the ratio of the etch depth and to the width of the 
feature, often given by the opening of the mask material.  These processes are relevant to the 
fabrication of vias, contact holes and isolation trenches [48].  Features are now produced for 3 -
dimensional (3D) memory devices having AR approaching 100.  Ideal HAR features have vertical 
side walls with widths replicating the mask with a minimum of bowing [50] or tapering [51].  There 
are many process-dependent challenges which make these outcomes difficult.  For example, pol-
ymer deposition is a critical process in dielectric plasma etching in fluorocarbon gas mixtures 
[52,53].  A critical process challenge is the control polymer deposition in the upper regions of the 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

4 
 
mask during the etch process, which may result in necking and clogging [44,54,55].  (Necking is 
the narrowing of the opening in the mask by polymer deposition.  Clogging is closing of the mask 
opening by the deposition.)  Both necking and clogging result from the same processes with dif-
ferent degrees of severity.  Clogging will stop etching while necking can limit neutral gas transport 
further into the feature, trap etched surface species and shadow ions and photons entering into the 
feature.  Modeling these processes, critical to feature optimization, is additionally challenged by 
lack of fundamental data.  
Physics informed ML approaches to process development have also taken the form of com-
pact or reduced models.  For example, through ML methods, reduced reaction mechanisms can be 
generated [56–58].  In a reduced reaction mechanism, species or reactions for which the outcome 
is weakly dependent are removed from a comprehensive mechanism, resulting in a model that is 
computationally more efficient.  Reduced reaction mechanisms, though more rapidly executing, 
are generally valid over a limited range of operation, such as power, gas mixture or pressure.   
The optimization of the reaction mechanism itself has been investigated using Monte Carlo 
approaches and simulations based on cellular automatons[59–63].  Optimization schemes such as 
evolutionary algorithms and particle swarm methods can require many evaluations of the model.  
This large number of evaluations can lead to a large computational expense or needing to reduce 
the domain over which the optimization is being performed, either spatially or in terms of interac-
tion complexity (e.g. limiting the number of species). 
In this paper, we discuss the development and application of a semi -autonomous optimi-
zation technique to derive physics -based coefficients for reactions mechanisms used in voxel -
based feature simulation of plasma etching.  The optimization technique couples a gradient descent 
method with a Nelder Mead approach.  The demonstration system is SiO2 HAR plasma etching in 
a fluorocarbon gas mixture  using a capacitively coupled plasma .  The reactor scale simulations 
that provide reactant fluxes were performed with the Hybrid Plasma Equipment Model (HPEM).  
The feature scale simulations were performed with the Monte Carlo Feature Profile Model 
(MCFPM).   
A high-level overview of the optimization scheme is given in Sec.  II.  The process to be 
optimized as well as the simulation tools used for the gas phase and feature scale simulation are 
discussed in Secs. III and IV.  Metrics for the optimization process are defined in Sec.  V.  The 
optimization schemes are described in Secs. VI and VII where the hybrid approach is motivated.  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

5 
 
Results of the combined optimization method are discussed in Sec. VIII.  To test the transferability 
of the derived mechanism, etch processes outside the original training regime were simulated, with 
those results being presented in Sec. IX for a single feature and for an array of features in Sec. X.  
Concluding remarks are in Sec. XI. 
 
II. Description of the optimization scheme 
The goal of this work is to optimize a reaction mechanism that describes plasma -surface 
interactions for SiO 2 etching that best replicates experimental data.  The experimental data was  
provided in the form of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images.  The optimization is centered 
on adjusting physics parameters in the reaction mechanism, represented by scalar values p i, each 
representing a physical quantity,  contained in a parameter set of dimension n, 
     
1
2
n
p
p
p


=


p
 .      (1) 
The size of the parameter space scales like O(cn), where c is a constant, making exhaustive search 
algorithms impractical for even moderately large numbers of parameters.  Enforcing constraints 
and relations based on prior physical knowledge of the likely range of p i can help to reduce the 
total parameter space and enable the use of conventional optimization techniques.  This physical 
knowledge is, in our case, implemented by using a well -established surface reaction mechanism 
having poorly known reaction probabilities, and applying physically reasonable bound s to those 
poorly known coefficients.   
The optimization scheme is based on a hybrid approach, combining a gradient descent 
method [5,64,65] with a Nelder-Mead optimization scheme [66–68].  A top-level overview of the 
method is shown in  Fig. 1.  The optimization setup requires external input (located on the left -
hand side of Fig. 1) which in this case are the reactant fluxes of radicals and ions and their energy 
and angular distributions (EADs) that are incident onto the wafer being processed.  These fluxes 
and EADs were provided by the HPEM using reactor conditions that produced the features imaged 
by the SEMS.  The fluxes and EADs provided by the HPEM are here considered as being ground 
truth.  A legitimate issue is the sensitivity of the optimized feature scale reaction mechanism to 
the accuracy of the fluxes and EADs provided by the HPEM.  The HPEM, as for all modeling and 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

6 
 
simulation approaches, is subject to 
approximations and simplifica-
tions.  This applies to its fluid ap-
proach and finite grid size as well 
the input data in terms of reaction 
rates, cross sections and material 
coefficients.  Although the quanti-
tative validity of the HPEM and re-
lated approaches in general i s an 
important area of  discussion, it is 
beyond the scope of this particular investigation which is focused on developing the feature scale 
reaction mechanism.  As such, the fluxes and EADs from the HPEM are treated as being true for 
the purposes of this discussion which is intended to be a proof of concept of the optimization 
process itself.  That said, the results presented below will highlight the ability of HPEM and 
MCFPM in conjunction to replicate relevant process trends.   Details of the experiment and gas 
phase simulation are provided in Sec. III. 
The gas phase fluxes and EADS are used as input to the MCFPM which performs the etch 
process simulations outlined in Sec.  IV.  The result s of these simulations are compared to the 
features in the SEM images.  Based on a set of geometric metrics, discussed in Sec.  V, a model 
error is determined.  The data produced by the MCFPM and their differences to experimental data 
effectively act as the loss function to be minimized.  The model error is used as the basis for the 
optimizer which iteratively adjusts the model parameters p to minimize the loss.  This loop is 
repeated until the system converges.   
 
III. Reactor Scale Plasma Simulation 
The reactor scale, gas phase simulations were performed using the Hybrid Plasma Equip-
ment Model (HPEM), which combines fluid and kinetic concepts to model a diverse set of plasma 
processes.  The HPEM is described in detail in Refs. [69–71] and so will be only briefly described 
here.   
The HPEM is a 2-dimensional plasma hydrodynamics model that employs both kinetic and 
fluid formulations to simulate low temperature plasmas using a time-slicing approach.  A range of 
 
Figure 1: Global schematic of the optimization process. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

7 
 
physics regimes are addressed in individual 
modules.  These modules are coupled through 
the exchange of physical quantities – such as 
electric and magnetic fields, species densities 
and rate coefficients.  The modules used in this 
work are the Fluid Kinetics -Poisson Module 
(FKPM), the Electron Energy Transport Mod-
ule (EETM), and the Plasma Chemistry Monte 
Carlo Module (PCMCM).   
In the FKPM, the continuity, momen-
tum, and energy equations of heavy particles are 
integrated in conjunction with Poisson’s equation, yielding heavy particle densities, fluxes, tem-
peratures and electrostatic potential.  Electron transport is determined by solving the continuity 
and momentum conservation equations.  In the EETM, electron energy distributions (EEDs) as a 
function of spatial position are obtained using a kinetic, Monte Carlo method based on the electric 
fields produced in the FKPM.  The energy and angular distributions (EAD) of electrons striking 
the substrate are also recorded in the EETM.  Based on the bulk plasma electron distributions, their 
transport and rate coefficients are produced and made available to the other modules.   
After reaching a (quasi) steady-state, the PCMCM calculates the heavy particle EADs in-
cident onto surfaces by tracking their trajectories kinetically and treating gas phase collision using 
a Monto Carlo approach.  These distributions are recorded and then used as input to the MCFPM.  
The HPEM was used to model a capaci-
tively coupled plasma (CCP) sustained in a 
C4F6/Ar/O2 gas mixture at 10 mTorr.  In the base 
case the total gas flows were C 4F6/Ar/O2 = 
140/100/105 sccm.  The reactor configuration is 
shown in Fig. 2.  Two electrodes with a radius of 
15 cm are separated by a 4 cm gap.  Dual radio 
frequency (RF) power VRF is applied to the bottom 
electrode.  The voltage waveform consists of low 
and high frequency components, V RF(t) = V LF 
 
Figure 2: CCP reactor geometry and circuit. 
 
Table 1: Base Case Fluxes to Wafer 
Species Flux (cm-2s-1) 
C3F4 9.5  1016 
C2F3 6.8  1016 
CF 4.4  1016 
CF2 9.4  1016 
CF3 8.4  1015 
O 7.7  1016 
Ions 1.2  1016 
 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

8 
 
sin(2πfLFt) + V HF sin(2πfHFt) with fLF = 1 MHz 
and f HF = 40 MHz.  For the base case , the low 
frequency voltage, VLF and high frequency volt-
age VHF, were adjusted to supply powers of PLF 
= 8.0 kW and PHF = 2.5 kW.  A negative DC bias 
of -500 V was applied to the top electrode, to 
deliver 650 W.  The gas phase reaction mecha-
nism is based on previous work [15,49] and 
contains 87 neutral, excited and ion species and 
1500 reactions. 
The spatial distributions of the electron 
density [e], electron temperature, T e, negative 
fluorine ion density [F -], ionization by bulk 
electrons Sb, and ionization by secondary elec-
trons Ss are shown in  Fig. 3.  Due to the large 
high frequency power which dominantly heats 
electrons, the electron density is high, with a 
maximum value of 9.5  1010 cm-3.  The bulk 
electron temperature, shown for electron densi-
ties > 1.0  109 cm-3, is 3.4 to 3.8 eV over the 
wafer.  High energy electrons are initially pro-
duced by secondary electron emission by ion 
bombardment, followed by acceleration in the 
sheaths.  The electron source generated by bulk 
electrons Sb, mirrors that of [e] and Te,.  Most of the ionization is produced by bulk processes.  The 
ionization produced by sheath accelerated beam electrons play a secondary but nevertheless im-
portant role in the overall ionization dynamics.  Fluorine and oxygen containing plasmas can have 
significant densities of negative ions.  The dens ity of F-, shown in Fig. 3c, has the largest density 
of negative ion in this process with a maximum density of 2.2  1010 cm-3.  Due to the plasma 
having, on the average, a positive electric potential, the F - ions are confined to the center of the 
plasma.  The negative ions have only a small overall effect on plasma transport dynamics to the 
 
Figure 3:  Plasma properties for the base case:  (a) 
Electron density [e], (b) electron temperature Te, 
(c) negative fluorine ion density [F-], (d) ioniza-
tion rate by bulk electrons and (e) ionization rate 
by secondary electrons. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

9 
 
wafer due to its negligible density close to the 
sheath region where its effect on electron heat-
ing dynamic would be the most important.   
Plasma-surface interactions result from 
the fluxes of reactive species and ions, and their 
energy and angular distributions onto the sur-
face.  The fluxes of the most significant neutral 
and ion species incident onto the wafer at radius 
of 7.5 cm are listed in  Table 1.  These fluxes 
include the fluorocarbon radicals most respon-
sible for polymer deposition as well as atomic 
oxygen which etches and removes the polymer.  
The ratio of the flux of ions and neutrals to the 
wafer is an important parameter in the overall 
process dynamics.  The anisotropy of the pro-
cess is enabled by the directionality of ions in-
cident onto the surface whereas the fluxes of neutral fluorocarbon radicals determine passivation.  
This is especially true for HAR processes in which the overall performance req uires a precise 
balance of deposition and removal of polymerizing radical fluxes, both of which are either indi-
rectly or directly dependent on the neutral as well as ion fluxes.  
In addition to the magnitude of the ion flux, the influence of energetic positive ion fluxes 
incident onto the surface and their transport through HAR features is sensitive to their energy and 
angular distribution (IEAD).  The combined IEAD of all positive  ion species onto the wafer is 
shown in Fig. 4a.  Due to the large applied low frequency power, the sheath potential and com-
mensurate DC self-bias, positive ions are accelerated vertically into the wafer while traversing the 
sheath.  This leads to a narrow  angular distribution of ions striking the wafer with energies up to 
4800 eV, both properties being desirable in the context of HAR etch processes. 
 
IV. Feature Scale Model 
The process investigated in this work is a HAR plasma etch into SiO2 using an amorphous 
carbon (AC) mask, schematically shown in Fig. 4b.  A SiO2 substrate is covered by a 850 nm thick 
 
Figure 4: Inputs for feature profile simulation:  a) 
Ion energy and angular distribution (IEAD) inci-
dent onto the wafer.  b) Initial feature geometry 
(not to scale) consisting of a SiO 2 substrate with 
an amorphous carbon mask. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

10 
 
AC film patterned to ideally yield a straight walled opening with an initial width of 90 nm.  The 
etch was performed for 60 seconds. 
The profile simulations were performed using the Monte Carlo Feature Scale Model 
(MCFPM) [7,15,48].  MCFPM resolves the bulk and surface properties on 3D cubic mesh.  Here, 
the mesh cells – voxels - have equal side lengths of 1 nm.  Each cell has a material identity.  Gas 
phase species represented by Monte Carlo pseudo particles are launched with fluxes, and energy 
and angular distributions obtained from HPEM.  In the MCFPM, c ell identities are changed, or 
cells are removed or added for reactions including passivation, etching and deposition.  The reac-
tions of thermal (low energy) species with the surface for processes that do not have a threshold 
energy are described by a reaction probability p.  Reactions of ions and hot neutrals (energetic ions 
Table 2: High-level description of the SiO2 and AC etch mechanism 
Species 
M       Ion or hot neutral 
S        Surface Site 
P        Polymer 
PC     Crosslinked polymer 
 
AC    Amorphous carbon mask 
(g)      Gas phase 
(s)      Solid 
Reaction Description 
SiO2(s) + M(g) →    SiO2(g) + M(g) Physical sputtering of SiO2 
S(s) + SiO2(g) →    S(s) + SiO2(s) SiO2 redeposition  
SiO2(s) + CxFy(g)      →    SiO2CxFy(s) SiO2 -Fluorocarbon complex formation 
SiO2CxFy(s) + M(g) →    SiO2CxFy(g) + M(g) Complex sputtering 
S(s) + CxFy(g)  →    S(s) + P(s) Polymer deposition on Surfaces 
P(s) + CxFy(g) →    P(s) + P(s) Polymer deposition on Polymer  
P(s) + O(g)   →    COFy(g) Polymer etch by O 
AC(s) + CxFy(g)   →    AC(s)+ P(s) Polymer deposition on AC  
P(s) + M(g) →    P(g) + M(g) Polymer sputtering 
AC(s) + M(g) →    AC(g) + M(g) AC sputtering 
P(s) + P(s) →   PC(s) + PC(s) Crosslinking 
PC(s) + PC(s) + M(g) →   P(s) + P(s) + M(g) Breaking of Crosslinking  
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

11 
 
that have been neutralized during collisions with surfaces) have reaction yields having an energy 
and angular dependence.  In the MCFPM the energy dependence of chemical and physical sput-
tering is implemented using the expression [15,49]  
 
( ) ( )
( )
0
0
q
th
q
th
pp



−
=
−  (2) 
for incident energy ε, reference energy ε0, reference probability p0 and threshold energy εth.  Unless 
indicated otherwise, the optimization of energy-dependent reaction probabilities refers to the value 
of p0.  The SiO2 reaction mechanism is based on previous work by Huang et al [49] and is described 
in detail in Ref. [15].  A high-level overview of the mechanism is listed in Table 2. 
 SiO2 can be removed through physical sputtering by energetic ions and hot neutrals.  The 
sputtered products can redeposit on other surfaces.  Unsaturated fluorocarbons can chemisorb on 
the SiO2 to form an oxide -fluorocarbon complex.  This complex is in turn easier to sputter based 
on lower threshold energy and overall higher reaction probability as the site has a lower binding 
energy.  Additional polymer can deposit on top of the complex as well as other surfaces, providing 
a physical barrier to further e tching and providing sidewall passivation.  The polymer can be re-
moved by physical sputtering or chemical etching by oxygen radicals.  The only O -containing 
radical having significant fluxes to the surface is ground state atomic oxygen.   
 The gas phase reactions with the mask and substrate are ultimately contained in a single 
global reaction mechanism where they interact and share certain reactions, such as polymer depo-
sition.  A high-level overview of the AC mask reaction mechanism is also in Table 2.  See supple-
mentary material at [URL will be inserted by AIP Publishing] for a listing of the full reaction 
mechanism.  The mask mechanism includes polymer deposition by CxFy precursors on AC and on 
prior deposited polymer.  Similar to the etch mechanism for SiO2, polymer is removed by oxygen 
radicals and physical sputtering.  The AC can be sputtered by ions and hot neutrals as well. 
 The polymer, as deposited, consists of individual CxFy radicals and so is strictly an assem-
bly of monomers.  This radical based film can subsequently crosslink to create an actual polymeric 
material that is more resistant to sputtering.  Ion bombardment can then break bonds (chain scis-
sion) to produce a lower molecular weight polymer.  A mechanism was developed to represent 
crosslinking between the deposited monomers and breaking of those crosslinks.   
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

12 
 
 A polymer’s physical and chemical 
properties can be dependent on crosslinks with 
neighboring species.  The manner of linkage de-
termines the reactivity of the polymer due to, for 
example, a lack of available radical sites for ad-
ditional bonding or more resistance to physical 
processes due to an increase in total bond 
strength.  These crosslinks can be broken by ex-
posure to the plasma producing energetic parti-
cles or radiation.  Since these energetic particles 
are typically delivered anisotropically to the 
surface, this spatially discriminat ing activation 
can result in shaping of the polymer deposition.  
A schematic of the crosslinking model is in Fig. 
5.  The creation of crosslinks during polymer 
deposition is represented in the left column (a -
d) and the removal or breaking of crosslinks is 
represented in the right column (e-g). 
Crosslinking occurs during the deposi-
tion of eligible materials ( Fig. 5a, b).  (By ma-
terial, we refer to incident species, such as CF 3 
or C2F3, or their counterparts in the film.)  Each 
material has a maximum number of neighbors 
to which it can crosslink based on the number 
of available bonds (3 in the example in  Fig. 5).  
For example, CF 2 would have a maximum of 2 crosslinks and CF 3 would have a maximum of a 
single crosslink.  When a crosslink eligible deposition material is incident onto the surface, a ran-
domly ordered search is conducted of nearest neighbors for other crosslink eligible materials that 
have available bonding sites.  Based on a prescribed crosslinking probability and choice of a ran-
dom number (0,1) crosslinks are made (or not made) with the  eligible neighbors.  The number of 
crosslinks (and the available bonding sites) are recorded for  each cell (Fig. 5c).  If crosslinking 
 
Figure 5: Schematic of the crosslink mechanism 
shown here in 2 dimensions.  a) incident particle, 
b) deposition, c) crosslink availability, d) change 
in properties, e) energetic particle bombardment, 
f) bond breaking, g) change in properties. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

13 
 
occurs the cell identities are changed to represent the change in 
physical properties of cell (Fig. 5d) that may include, for example, 
sputtering probability. 
Crosslinks can be broken by impinging particles such as 
ions, hot neutrals and photons ( Fig. 5e).  The bond breaking is 
represented by decreasing the crosslink number for both crosslink 
partners (Fig. 5f) and reversion of the material identify back to an 
unlinked state (Fig. 5g).   
Since the control of necking and clogging by polymer dep-
osition is of special interest we discuss an important control pa-
rameter.  The amount of polymer growth is determined by the rel-
ative contributions of deposition and removal.  A steady state pol-
ymer thickness occurs when these contributions balance.  Polymer 
removal occurs by sputtering and O-radical based etching.  In ox-
ygen rich gas mixtures, polymer removal can be dominated by O-
radical based etching, mostly ground state atomic oxygen.  In the 
mechanism discussed here, necking and clogging (the amount of 
polymer deposition in the mask region) can ultimately be con-
trolled by the reaction probability of the O based polymer etching.  
The final etch profiles for otherwise identical process conditions 
are shown in Fig. 6 while varying the probability of polymer etch-
ing by O-atoms.  An etch probability of 0.005 results in net poly-
mer growth which ultimately leads to a complete clog at the top of 
the feature.  Higher removal probabilities, while still produc ing 
significant necking, do not fully clog the feature and allow for con-
tinued etching throughout the entire process , as shown in Fig. 6 
for a probability of 0.02. 
 
V. Target Metrics and Loss function 
A scalar metric is needed to evaluate the quality of the simulation -experiment matching 
when tuning the reaction mechanism.  In this work the loss function L(p) of a given parameter set 
 
Figure 6: Etch features for 
different O based polymer 
etch probabilities of a) 0.005 
and b) 0.02. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

14 
 
p is the  root-mean-squared ( RMS) error between the 
simulation and experiment of geometric parameters de-
fining the shape of the etched feature, shown in Fig. 7.  
While these shape parameters are not independent of 
each other, they nevertheless each aim to represent a 
specific characteristic of the feature that is of technical 
relevance.  The width of the mask opening wm including 
deposition stands as a measure of the necking and clog-
ging, a process which is dependent on the ratio of the 
fluxes of polymer depositing to removing species.  The 
narrowed opening can impede neutral gas transport into 
the feature, trap etch products inside the feature and 
shadow the trajectories of ions and photons.  Although 
the shape (curvature) of the polymer deposition is not a 
parameter in this investigation, the curvature of the pol-
ymer affects the angle of the trajectory with which ions 
(hot neutrals) reflect from its surface as they progress 
deeper into the surface.  A higher-level approach might 
include shape (curvature) of the polymer in the optimi-
zation process. 
The width at the top of the feature, w t, aims to 
capture undercutting (etching under the mask) that most 
often occurs with excessive isotropic etching of the sub-
strate or with there being insufficient passivation of the 
surface of the substrate compared to that of the mask material.  The maximum width of the feature 
wf, captures the occurrence of bowing or tapering, which can be caused by lack of passivation or 
broad ion angular distributions (bowing) or excessive passivation (tapering).   
Mask selectivity refers to the relative rate of etching of the mask compared to the substrate.  
Masks for HAR etching must have high selectivity (low etch rate) compared to the substrate so 
that the mask has a reasonably small thickness.  The thickness of the mask hm must be controlled 
to ensure that the mask has a critical thickness at the end of the etch.  The thickness of the mask 
 
Figure 7: Feature specifications. a) Tar-
get metrics used to evaluate the experi-
mental matching. b) SEM image from 
the base case experiment used for evalu-
ation of the model. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

15 
 
determines the degree to which ions having broad angular spread are shadowed by and reflect off 
the mask prior to entering the feature.  The depth of the final feature, hf, fundamentally defines the 
characteristics of HAR features and for a given process time determines the etch rate.  Undesired 
etch defects such as twisting [72] can be captured by measuring the asymmetry, a h, across the 
vertical center axis (dotted vertical line in Fig. 7).   
The loss function is then 
 
2 2 2 2 2 2 ˆ( ˆˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ( ) ( ) ( ) () ) ( ) ( )wm m m wt t t wh h h whm m m wf f f wah h hL a w w a w w a w w a h h a h h a a a− + − + − + − − −= ++p  (3) 
where the hat accent (^) denotes the target value of a property.  Each singular error component can 
be weighted in accordance to its importance or sensitivity by the weight factors ai.  In this work 
all components are equally weighted with the exception of the total asymmetry, awah, which has a 
higher weighting.  The total asymmetry is computed based on the total number of asymmetric 
computational cells which has a substantially different scale than the other factors.   
 For any given evaluation of the loss function
()L p , the MCFPM is executed to simulate a 
full etch of 60 s which carries with it a computational cost.  The method of evaluating and mini-
mizing 
()L p  through the optimization algorithm should have the goal of minimizing the number 
of evaluations.  In this work , the target metrics are based on the scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) image shown in Fig. 7.  This image was produced after the process described in Sec. III 
was performed in a reactor on which the simulated geometry was based.  
  
VI. Gradient Descent 
Gradient descent (GD) is a method for minimizing a multivariate error function, which is 
convenient due to its conceptual simplicity, universality and fast convergence.  The G D method 
has been applied to a wide variety of physical and engineering problems. [64,65,73–77]  In short, 
GD is based on following the gradient of a loss function L to its minimum as shown in Fig. 8.  For 
a given set of parameters pi the selection of the next set of parameters is  
    
1 ()i i i L+ = − p p p ,     (4) 
where η is the learning rate which controls the effective step size and the rate of descent.  The loss 
function consists of a set of discrete points that results from successive runs of the MCFPM and 
so is not natively differentiable.  A finite difference scheme was used to estimate the partial gradi-
ents in every dimension by evaluating L(p) at a test location L(p′), 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

16 
 
     
( ) ( )j j jL L p =+p p x ,     (5) 
with xj, the displacement unit vector and 𝑝’𝑗, the branch step size for every dimension of the pa-
rameter space n and computing the relative derivative ΔL/ Δpj.  Effectively, the discrete gradient 
descent formulation becomes 
1
11
( ) ( )iinn
i i i
jj ii
jj j j j
LLL
p p p+
==
−= − = − −
ppp p x p x
  (6) 
A useful modification to the gradient descent method is the  use of a momentum term that 
enables the method to overcome local extrema and avoid convergence around a non-global mini-
mum.  Analogous to the momentum in Newtonian physics, momentum in GD adds an inertia term 
to the updated parameters.  The previous gradient is remembered and the update on the next itera-
tion is determined by the effective gradient gi which is a linear combination of the actual gradient 
and the previous update: 
 
1i i i + =−p p g  (1) 
with  
 
1 ()i i i L −= +g g p ,
 (2)  
where β is the momentum decay coefficient which de-
termines the overall strength of the momentum term .  
Akin to a heavy ball, rolling down a gravitational po-
tential (referred to as heavy ball method) the gradient 
descent is less affected by small scale perturbation or 
“roughness” of the loss function surface.  
 Based on this methodology, an initial optimiza-
tion was performed.  The tuning parameters as well as 
the range of their permitted values are listed in Table 3. 
In the context of the surface reaction mechanism these 
5 parameters affect a class of reactions with many indi-
vidual reactions.  For example, ps,SiO2, the sputter prob-
ability of SiO2 and ps,SiO2CFXY, the sputter probability of 
SiO2-polymer complex affect all ion and fast neutral 
 
Figure 8: Outline of the gradient descent 
method for a 1D parameter space. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

17 
 
surface reactions, 44, respectively.  The target metrics obtained from experimental data are listed 
in Table 4.  The choice of the range of permitted values was based on prior experience and 
knowledge of the dominating physics.  A judicious choice of the range of permitted values speeds 
the optimization process while also preventing the optimization process from converging on a non-
physical set of parameters.  For example, if a non-physical value of polymer etching probability is 
allowed, the optimization algorithm might compensat e for that value with non -physical value of 
another parameter.   
The initial optimization was performed for a total of 100 epochs  .  (An epoch is single round 
of evaluating the loss function with a given set of parameters.)  The evolution of the total loss 
function is shown in Fig. 9a as a function of the number of elapsed epochs.  The total loss quickly 
decreased during the first 20 epochs which indicates a partially successful optimization.  This con-
vergence is mirrored by the evolution of the target metrics, shown in Fig. 9b.  The three metrics, 
etch depth h f (blue squares), min imum mask opening w m (red pyramid) and max imum feature 
width wf (green delta) quickly approach their target values, represented by dashed horizontal lines.  
The remaining metrics were fairly insen sitive to changes in the mechanism.  In order to reduce 
clutter, they were omitted from the plot. 
Some of the trends in computed metrics are correlated to the underlying adjustments to the 
parameters defining the 
etching mechanism, a se-
lection of which are shown 
in Fig. 9c.  The increase in 
final predicted etch depth, 
for example , can be ex-
plained by changes to the 
Table 4:Target metrics for optimization 
Symbol Description Target value 
wm Width of mask opening 45 nm 
wt Width at the top of the feature 90 nm 
wf Maximum width of the feature 90 nm 
hf Etch depth 825 nm 
hm Remaining mask thickness 850 nm 
ah Asymmetry 0 
 
Table 3: Tuning parameters for optimization 
Symbol Description Minimum 
Value 
Maximum 
Value 
 
ps,SiO2 Sputter probability of SiO2 0.0 0.3  
ps,SiO2CFXY Sputter probability of SiO2-polymer complex 0.1 0.5  
pp,SiO2 SiO2-polymer-complex formation probability 0.1 0.5  
pe,poly O based polymer etch 0.0 0.5  
pd,poly-AC Polymer deposition probability on mask 0.0 0.5  
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

18 
 
SiO2-polymer complex formation probability , 
pp,SiO2, and its sputter probability , p s,SiO2CFXY , 
both of which increase in tandem with the in-
crease in final etch depth .  However, beyond 
epoch 20, the clear trend towards error minimi-
zation breaks down and instabilities both in the 
model error and in the metrics emerge.  In terms 
of the loss function composition, this breakdown 
seems to be dominated by large swings in hf, sug-
gesting its especially high sensitivity to aburpt 
changes in the mechanism.  This breakdown re-
sults from the underlying definition of the loss 
function.   
 The step size with which the parameter 
space is traversed is inherently tied to the magni-
tude of the gradient (Eq. (6)) and should dimin-
ish as one approaches the minimum (zero gradi-
ent).  L(p) is derived from predicted profiles pro-
duced by the MCFPM which has a finite grid res-
olution – the dimension of the voxel.  As the step 
size diminishes, producing a small change in the 
physics coefficients, the physical change in the 
predicted profile may not exceed the size of the 
voxel and there is no change in the loss function.  
At this point, the loss function is no longer dif-
ferentiable, as shown in Fig. 10.  This condition 
can lead to an absence of a gradient  when the change in the profile stays within a single vox el, 
producing a breakdown of the functional relation between p and L(p) = L = const ant.  Another 
outcome is an overestimation of the gradient when a small change in p causes the previous static 
profile to change to a different voxel providing a finitely large response. 
 
Figure 9: Results from the gradient descent opti-
mization for etch parameters as a function of 
epoch.  a) Minimal epochal loss, b) values of se-
lect metrics as a function of epochs and c) select 
model parameters as a function of epochs. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

19 
 
 The GD method provides 
rapid initial convergence but is po-
tentially erratic when approaching 
the optimum, in part due to the dis-
crete changes in the loss as the res-
olution approaches that of the 
voxel-based mesh.  The behavior of 
the GD and control of the speed of 
the initial descent speed is a function of the learning rate η .  The evolution of L( p) for different 
learning rates η = 110-4, 510-4, 110-3 and 510-3 is shown in Fig.  11.  The rate of descent is 
correlated to η.  A  smaller learning rate leads to smaller step sizes used to traverse  across the 
parameter space and, consequently, a slower overall descent.  Due to the limitations of the method 
that result from the erratic differentiation near convergence (an outcome of the finite voxel size),  
all optimizations eventually result in a convergence failure, independent of the learning rate. 
 In spite of the limitations imposed by the 
finite difference approach , the GD method has 
the ability to overcome local minima (to some 
degree) while having rapid and controllable ini-
tial descent .  This rapid initial convergence is 
particularly important in minimizing the number 
of loss function evaluations and so minimizing 
computational cost.  As a result, one is motivated 
to retain the GD method to approach the opti-
mized values, followed by a more robust though 
possibly more slowly converging optimizati on 
method.  In this work the Nelder -Mead method 
was selected to perform this latter task. 
 
VII. Nelder-Mead optimization 
 The Nelder-Mead method is a gradient free optimization algorithm that has been used in a 
wide variety of optimization problems  [78–84].  Conceptually, the Nelder -Mead (NM) method 
 
Figure  11: Evolution of the total loss for differ-
ent learning rates η = 110-4, 510-4, 110-3 and 
510-3. 
 
 
Figure 10: The finite resolution of the loss function leads to 
convergence issues. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

20 
 
represents the tuning parameters as a point in an 
n-dimensional solution space, where n is the 
number of tuning parameters to be optimized .  
A simplex, an object with n+1 vertices, each 
representing a different set of parameters, is em-
ployed to traverse the solution space  through 
geometric transformations along its centroid x0.  
An example is shown in Fig. 12 with n = 2 – a 
2D solution space where the simplex is a trian-
gle: 
• Sorting: The points are sorted accord-
ing to their loss function from best 
(lowest loss) to worst (highest loss) 
L(u) < L(v)  < L(w) 
• Reflection: Reflect the worst point, w, 
across the centroid;  r = x0 + α(x0 - w), 
with α > 0. 
• Extension: Extend the reflection be-
yond point r; e = x0 + γ(r - x0), with γ > 1. 
• Contraction: Generate two points, c0 and c1, that represent contractions of r towards w;  
c0 = x0 +  ρ(r - x0) and c1 = x0 +  ρ(w - x0) with 0 < ρ < 0.5 
• Shrinkage: Shrink the simplex towards the best point;  w’ = u + σ(w - u) and v’ = u + 
σ(v - u), with  0 < σ < 1 
Using these geometric transformations, the NM algorithm consists of a specific set of de-
cisions, which leads to an iterative loop that requires at least one successive evaluation of the loss 
function and a maximum of 4 evaluations per epoch.  A flow chart of the Nelder-Mead algorithm 
is shown in  Fig 13.  Every epoch begins by sorting the simplex points according to their loss 
function value, with L(u) < L(v) < L(w).  Reflection is always the first geometric operation to be 
tested.  If the reflected point, r, is better than the previous second point but worse than the best 
(L(u) < L(r)  < L(v)), the reflected point replaces the previously worst point ( w = r ) and the epoch 
ends.  If r is better than the previously most preferred point (L(r) < L(u)) the extension point e is 
 
Figure 12: Examples of the geometric transfor-
mations of the parameter simplex in a 2D param-
eter space; reflection, extension; contraction; 
shrinkage. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

21 
 
tested and added to the simplex if it outperforms 
r (L(e) < L(r)).  If the reflected point r is worse 
than all other simplex points, the contraction is 
performed.  If neither c0 nor c1  have a lower loss 
than r, the simplex is shrunk and the next epoch 
is initiated.  This loop continues until the maxi-
mum number of iterations is reached or the 
specified convergence has been reached.  Since 
the individual parameters represent physical 
quantities, additional constraints can be placed 
on the values of the parameters.  For example, 
sputter yields less than zero or reaction proba-
bilities greater than one can be accounted for by 
limiting respective transformation s to valid 
ranges. 
Since NM is a direct search method 
(only relies on direct evaluations of the loss 
function itself) , NM does not suffer from the 
same issues that arise with GD which relies on 
discrete differentiation.  NM is regarded as heu-
ristic optimization in this context .  A lthough 
convergence is technically not formally guaran-
teed, from a practical perspective NM does 
nearly always converge.  This convergence re-
sults from the finite grid size.  The loss function 
effectively becomes insensitive to perturbations 
below a certain threshold.  Once the optimization process switches from GD to NM, no instabilities 
or non-stationary convergences were encountered.  
The use of NM as the only convergence method is somewhat vulnerable to the presence of 
local minima.  T hat is, NM  may converge around a non -global minimum.  This propensity for 
local convergence increases for higher order problems as the size of the parameter space increases.  
 
Figure 13: Flow chart describing the Nelder -
Mead optimization algorithm 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

22 
 
This tendency for local convergence is greatly reduced by initializing the first simplex in the vi-
cinity of the absolute minimum as provided by the initial GD method.  That is, the first simplex is 
not initialized at a random location.  As a result, the NM portion of the optimization does not need 
to perform complete coverage of the parameter space nor conduct an exhaustive search.  For our 
conditions, the sequential GD -NM approach minimized the computational load by reducing the 
number of loss function evaluations compared 
to random scatter initialization or swa rm opti-
mization methods [85]. 
 
VIII. Hybrid GD-NM Optimization 
Sequentially executing GD and NM op-
timization algorithms produces a hybrid scheme 
whose goal is to address the weakness of each 
singular approach while capturing their positive 
qualities.  The two optimizers are executed se-
quentially.  The initial gradient descent method 
is the same as described in Sec. XI and is exe-
cuted for a prescribed number of epochs.  After 
the final GD epoch, the NM method is initial-
ized.  The NM method requires at least n+1 
points the parameter space to construct the sim-
plex object.  The set of initial simplex points 
contains the best and last point (in terms of loss) 
obtained from the GD method as well as the best 
n-2 points taken from a randomly distributed 
scatter across the entire parameter space.  In this 
case 20 random samples were used.  This tech-
nique provides for the translation of  the GD re-
sults as well as an adequate spread across the 
parameter space to prevent an early false con-
vergence of the NM method.  
 
Figure 14: Results from the combined gradient 
descent and Nelder-Mead optimization. a) Mini-
mal epochal loss, b) values of select metrics as a 
function of epochs  and c) select model parame-
ters as a function of epochs. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

23 
 
The convergence and output 
parameters produced by the hybrid op-
timization scheme are shown in Fig. 14 
as a function of epoch for the same 
conditions as in Fig. 9:  a) minimum 
epochal error, b) selected metrics and 
c) evolution of the tuning parameters .  
The evolution of the total model erro r 
has 3 stages.  The first stage consists of 
the initial rapid descent and nearly monotonic reduction of the loss function , enabled by the gra-
dient descent with an appropriate learning rate.  Starting at approximately epoch 20, Stage II suf-
fers from convergence instabilities which is reflected in fluctuations in the target metrics (Fig. 14b) 
and model parameters (Fig. 14c).  At epoch 100, Stage 3, the gradient descent is terminated and, 
based on its results, the NM algorithm is initiated.  The fluctuations are rapidly dampened and a 
stable convergence commences .  The error drops to approx imately 310-3 which given the grid 
resolution is on the order of a single cell  or less.  This minimization in error is mirrored in the 
target metrics (Fig. 14b) which converge to the desired values.  The final parameter set is listed in 
Table 5. 
The definition of model physics parameters based on this optimizer algorithm is based on 
the reduced scalar representation of the feature .  The method will not capture effects that are not 
included in the target metrics.  For example, a subset of the features produced by the MCFPM after 
the full etch process  are shown in Fig. 15 as a function of epochal progression .  (These features 
are predictions at the end of the full etch period for a particular set of model parameters corre-
sponding to an epoch. The sequence of features is not the temporal evolution of the feature itself).  
The SEM from which the target metrics were extracted is also shown (grayscale).  Here, too, the 
optimization stages can be identified.  During epochs 0 – 20, belonging to stage I (initial descent), 
the monotonic behavior is reflected in the increasing etch depth and widening of the necking.  The 
increased etch rate directly co rrelates with increasing oxide -polymer complex formation, its re-
moval and increases in the SiO2 sputter rate.  The decreased polymer deposition at the top of  the 
mask is a consequence of the increasing polymer etch by oxygen. 
 Stage II (instabilities) produces erratic behavior in the predicted profiles with an absence 
Table 5: Final tuning parameters after coupled opti-
mization 
Tuning Parameter 
Value 
Single 
Feature 
4-Feature 
Array 
ps,SiO2 0.0852 0.0909 
ps,SiO2CFXY 0.1471 0.1384 
pp,SiO2 0.278 0.2729 
pe,poly 0.0423 0.0628 
pd,poly-AC 0.094 0.0842 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

24 
 
of clear trends.  Between epochs 20 and 100 the etch depth and polymer deposition vary seemingly 
randomly without clear trends.  In Stage III and with the change to the Nelder-Mead algorithm for 
epochs 100-200, the mechanism converges with a lack of non-monotonic evolution of the metrics. 
In the absence of a gradient (as in the Nelder-Mead method) the convergence failure is eliminated 
with there being no changes to the simulation setup, structure of the reaction mechanism and pro-
cess sensitivities.  This outcome supports the proposal that the inadequate gradient determination 
is the primary failure mode. 
   Overall the final simulated etch feature at epoch 200 is in good agreement with the exper-
imental counterpart in terms of the metrics used in the optimization process.  There are, however, 
some key differences between the predicted profiles and the experimental SEM.  F or example, 
there are differences in the vertical position of the minimum in necking and the taper of the mask.  
The mismatch in these properties is due to the fact that they were not part of the optimization 
 
Figure  15: Final features after etch completion for different parameter sets as a function of epochal 
evolution and the actual experimental target feature. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

25 
 
metrics.  Assuming that the optimization process produced good model parameters, these differ-
ences indicate that a) the mechanism lacks processes that would otherwise determine the necking 
location or taper, b) the non-optimized physics parameters are not accurate and/or c) the solution 
is not unique and a second solution might better capture these phenomena.   
 The lack of guaranteed uniqueness is a drawback of most optimization schemes, including 
this one.  The physics informed nature of the this approach does, however, enhance physical un-
derstanding through the choice of reaction mechanism and the derived parameters . Omitting 
known minor reactions and setting reasonable ranges of parameters may reduce the applicability 
of the reaction mechanism while increasing the likelihood of a physically valid and unique out-
come.  There is inevitably a tradeoff between general applicability and uniqueness of the solution 
for a more narrowly defined problem.  These results stress the importance of including metrics that 
address the most critical properties of the features in the optimization process, as well as the phys-
ics in the reaction mechanism that correlate to those properties.  For example, taper of the feature 
is known to be sensitive to the chemical sputtering probability as a function of angle of incidence 
of energetic particles.  This physics parameter was included in our mechanism but was not part of 
the optimization process. 
In this context, metrics and the optimization processes are as a whole coupled, requiring at 
least a partial simultaneous evaluation .  That is, independently optimizing each metric will not 
produce the desired result.  This coupling can be demonstrated by the relationship between necking 
and clogging, and feature evolution.   Necking or, in the extreme, clogging reduces or entirely 
impedes the transport of reactive species and ions into the feature, slowing or terminating the etch 
process.  In the event of clogging, the etch process is stopped which prevents evaluation and opti-
mization of the etch process as a whole.  Since in this work metrics are only derived from the final 
feature after a fixed etch time, there is no mechanism to differentiate between two fully clogged 
features based on the mask metrics alone.  The width of mask opening is wm = 0 in both cases even 
if the rates of the deposition were different and the clogging occurred at different times during the 
etch.  However, differences in rates of, for example, deposition can affect the time that the feature 
finally clogs.  The longer the time that the feature is not clogged, the deeper the total etch depth.  
Through this mechanism, the etch depth acts as a seconda ry metric for the clogging mechanism, 
without which prior attempts to optimize the isolated mask mechanism failed.  
Overall, the hybrid optimization scheme performed satisfactory in that it produced a 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

26 
 
mechanism that reproduces the desired feature with high accuracy .  However, aspects of the pro-
cess have potential for improvement, particularly with respect to the require computer time.  For 
example, A single optimization requires approximately 20 CPU hours Intel Xeon Gold 6254 pro-
cessor.  This does not include the initial HPEM run required as input.  The epoch at which switch-
ing between GD and NM methods should be carefully chose n.  Epochs spent in Stage II produce 
little additional information and are not a good use of computing resources.  Such hybrid optimi-
zation schemes should include a mechanism or criterion to identify convergence failure of the GD 
and automatically switch to the secondary algo-
rithm.  A careful choice of the needed conver-
gence would also minimize the number of 
epochs spent in Stage III.  
 
IX. Transferability of the converged mecha-
nism 
A test of whether the derived model pa-
rameters are physically relevant  is to evaluate 
their transferability to related processes.  Given 
the small sample set, overfitting or circumstan-
tial unphysical results are a major concern.  We 
use the term related processes deliberately.  The 
parameters that have been derived from the op-
timization process are physics parameters that 
should, in principle, apply to a wide range of 
process conditions.  However, there is a practi-
cal limit.  For example, introduction of new 
gases or new method of excitation (inductively 
coupled vs capacitively coupled) would likely 
exceed that limit or require additional parame-
ters in the optimization process.  
i. Variation of O2 in flow 
To test the applicability of the derived 
 
Figure 16: Parametric data for application of de-
rived parameters to other etch conditions. a) 
Fluxes incident on the wafer surface as a function 
or the O2/C4F6 feedstock gas ratio. b) IEADs onto 
the wafer resulting for the low frequency power 
PLF = 0, 4, 6 and 8 kW. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

27 
 
model parameters, a process with a different in-
put power (PLF = 6.0 kW and PHF = 2.5 kW) was 
simulated with differing oxygen to fluorocarbon 
feedstock gas ratios  (O2/C4F6 = 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 
2.5).  All other conditions were kept the same as 
the base case .  The most significant changes 
compared to the base case were in the particle 
fluxes incident on the wafer surface, which are 
shown as function of the feed gas ratio in  Fig. 
16a.  The variation in the O 2/C4F6 ratio was 
achieved, experimentally and in the simulation, 
by adjusting the rate of oxygen inflow only.  As 
a consequence, the fluxes of the major contrib-
uting fluorocarbons remain nearly constant.  
The O-atom flux increases from 4.1  1016 to 
1.5  1017 cm-2s-1, a factor of 3.6 , with an in-
crease of the oxygen inflow by factor of 5 .  
These trends indicate that mole fractions of 
feedstock gases do not translate one -to-one to 
the surface fluxes. 
The features generated by MCFPM us-
ing the derived reaction parameters and their ex-
perimental counterpart s are shown in  Fig. 17 .  
Although the reaction mechanism used in 
MCFPM was not specifically tuned for these 
process conditions, relevant trends were quali-
tatively reproduced.  For example, trends in pol-
ymer deposition on the mask are reproduced.  At low O2 fraction and low O-atom flux, the O based 
etching of deposited polymer is low which leads to full clogging of the feature in both the experi-
ment and simulation.  With increasing O2 the rate at which polymer is removed increases and the 
necking is reduced, being essentially absent for the O2/C4F6 = 2.5 case.   
 
Figure 17: Variation of oxygen in O 2/C4F6 gas 
mixtures:  a) Predicted features. b) SEM images 
of the features resulting from the corresponding 
experiments. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

28 
 
The lack of polymer film on the mask leads to increased mask erosion with increasing O2 
inflow.  The amount of mask erosion in the simulated features is not in quantitative agreement 
with the experimental results.  This lack of quantitative agreement is likely due to not having the 
necessary physical processes in the mechanism despite not being specifically required for the ini-
tial optimization process.  For example, direct oxidation of the AC mask by O 2 was not included 
in the mechanism, but may become important at larger O2 flow rates.  The etch depth is related to 
the mask necking through reduction in particle transport into the feature and through onset of an 
etch stop with full clogging.  T he full clogging of the feature for O2/C4F6 = 0.5 is reproduced by 
the simulation, however etch depth for the fully clogged feature is not reproduced as this depth 
depends on when the feature was clogged.   
The experiments show maximum etch depth for O 2/C4F6 = 1.5, which is not the case for 
the simulation. The fact that the etch  rate does not increase from O 2/C4F6 = 1.5 to 2.5 cannot be 
explained by differences in physical transport alone.  In the reaction mechanism, the CxFy radicals 
can deposit on the mask and in the feature, and subsequently be removed by O atom etching.  At 
this point, the CxFy becomes unavailable at the etch front.  The relative increase of O atom flux 
may produce a certain level of fluorocarbon-starvation that limits the etch rate.    
Overall, however, the predicted trends generally agree with experiments.  This outcome is 
not necessarily the expectation given the fact that the mechanism was tuned for only a single dif-
ferent process.  The emergence of these untrained trends is a consequence of using a physics in-
formed optimization approach where the derived parameters are physics parameters and not simply 
fitting parameters.  The ability to reproduce the experimental trends, to some degree, speaks to this 
approach's ability to avoid overfitting issues. While not exhaus tively demonstrated, the effective 
parameter space reduction introduced by the physics informed approach seems to have enabled the 
extrapolation of the model beyond its trainig regime.   These trends also rely on the fluxes produced 
by the HPEM being ground truth and accurately representing experimental fluxes, which adds 
additional variability to the process.  
ii. Variation of low frequency power 
 As second test of the model parameters derived from the optimization process was predic-
tion of feature profiles while varying the low frequency power,  PLF = 0, 4, 6 and 8 kW.  The low 
frequency power is often used to control the ion energy at the surface of the wafer.  IEADs onto 
the wafer are a first-order process variable in HAR etching.  The IEADs produced by HPEM for 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

29 
 
this range of P LF are shown in Fig. 16b) with 
there being a direct correlation between PLF and 
the mean and maximum energies of ions at the 
wafer.  While the IEAD for PLF = 0 kW has the 
lowest energies , the distribution does contain 
ions exceeding 500 eV.  The high frequency RF 
power alone produces oscillation in the plasma 
potential and high energy ions.  The maximum 
angular spread has little variation as a function 
of PLF, with the exception of PLF = 0 kW which 
has significant broadening of the angular distri-
bution.   
 Using the derived model parameters, 
MCFPM simulations were performed  for the 
different values of P LF = 0.  Those results and 
the experimental SEM reference s are shown in 
Fig. 18.  The profiles, experiment an d simula-
tion, for PLF = 0 kW produce total clogging of 
the mask opening , indicating that ion energy 
through sputtering plays an important role in re-
moving excess polymer .  The remaining cases 
(PLF = 4, 6 and 8 kW) have unclogged features 
and full etching with unexpected little variation 
of the etch depth as a function of low frequency.  
In the experimental data a doubling of the PLF (4 kW to 8 k W) produces few differences in the 
final features.  These trends indicate that above a certain threshold energy the etch progression and 
the mask removal process are not ion starved, but rather limited by neutral gas transport.  To some 
degree this trend is reproduced by the simulations where etch depth does increase with increasing 
low frequency power however the rate of  increase is substantially sublinear  with , 635 nm, 715 
nm, 720 nm of final etch depth respectively.  These outcomes indicate that the effect of ion energy 
(for example in sputter yield or related processes) might be overestimated in the m echanism.  
 
Figure 18: Variation of low frequency power.  a) 
Predicted features. b) SEM images of the features 
resulting from the corresponding experiments. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

30 
 
Again, this assessment assumes that the results 
produced by the HPEM are ground truth.  
 
X. Optimization based on multiple features 
Monte Carlo based simulations are in-
herently subject to statistical variations .  Since 
the loss function used for optimization is based 
on a single feature’s properties, overfitting of 
the target metrics may occur.  To partially miti-
gate and to roughly estimate the degree of over-
fitting, the optimization was performed on a lin-
ear array of four features.  The individual fea-
tures in the 4-feature array are identical to those 
used in optimizations to th is point.  The width 
of the features is 90 nm, with a center-to-center 
pitch spacing of 130 nm, and distance between 
the edges of features 40 nm.  Using the 4-feature 
array, the total loss function to be minimized is 
the average of the loss functions of the individ-
ual features.  The pseudo particles directed to-
wards the feature array from the top of the sim-
ulation domain in the MCFPM are launch ed 
based on a shared random number pool .  The 
pseudo particles are lau nched randomly onto 
the surface encompassing all 4 features, a pro-
cess which introduces statistical vari ation be-
tween the features.  The number of pseudo particles used in the simulation was increased so that 
during a given time interval, the particle flux (particles/area) was the same as for a single feature. 
Apart from the change in feature geometry, the optimization process is unchanged.  Anal-
ogous to the results discussed in Sec. VIII for a single feature , the epochal evolution of the loss 
function for the 4-feature array is shown in Fig. 19a.  As with the single feature optimization , 3 
 
Figure 19: Results of the feature array optimiza-
tion.  a) Minimal epochal loss, b) values of select 
metrics as a function of epochs  and c) select 
model parameters as a function of epochs. 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

31 
 
distinct stages in the optimization can be identified.  The initial descent (Stage I) commences more 
rapidly than with the single feature in spite of what should be the same learning rates.  This out-
come may be the result of the induced statistical variation due to the launching of particles which 
is shared among the features.  That variation, to a degree, remedies some of the initial overfitting 
to statistical noise and enables a smoother gradient descent.  While the convergence failure (Stage 
II) still occurs, the random oscillation of the loss is significantly dampened compared to that for a 
single feature (Fig. 14a).  This outcome is likely due to the propensity for incorrect gradient cal-
culations for any single feature being partially negated by acceptable gradient calculations in other 
features.  T he errant gradient calculations are unlikely to occur in all features at the same time.  
The final convergence (Stage III) is similar to that of the single feature optimization in that the loss 
rapidly converges to a stable value.  Although the final loss is slightly larger than that for a single 
feature, it is still determined by feature variations on the order of a single numerical cell. 
These trends are confirmed by the convergence of the metrics s hown in Fig. 19b, which 
are the average of the 4 features.   All metrics converge to their respective targets.  Compared to 
the single feature, the initial approach of the metrics to their targets is faster and the intermediate 
non-convergence oscillations are less erratic and of smaller magnitude.  The corresponding tuning 
parameters are shown in Fig. 19c.  While their epochal evolution differs from that  of the single 
feature, their final values are similar.  The final values of the turning parameters for the 4-feature 
array are listed in Table 5.   
The feature arrays produced as a function of epoch are shown in Fig. 20.  As with the single 
feature optimization, the initial mechanism produces clogged features, caused by insufficient pol-
ymer etching and which leads to an early etch stop.  With progressing epochs (left to right in Fig. 
20), the net polymer deposition is reduced and the etch rate and etch depth increase.  At epoch 100, 
immediately before stage III, the scalar metrics ( Fig. 19b) and 2D feature representation both in-
dicate a good match in etch depth but excessive feature bowing which is largely removed with 
subsequent ongoing optimization.  As in experimental etching of arrays of features, there is some 
statistical variation from feature to feature.  For example, the SEMS in Figs. 17 and 18 show fea-
ture to feature variation due to the statistica l nature of the reactant fluxes entering each feature.  
This feature to feature variation occurs in the simulations for the same reason. 
 While these findings indicate that the optimization based on feature arrays is generally 
preferable to that using only a single feature, these improvements must be weighed against the 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

32 
 
increase in computational cost that is incurred by the larger geometry and subsequent increase in 
total number of cells and in the number of pseudoparticles that must be launched .  Overall, the 
required computation time increases linearily with the number of features .  A pproximagely 80 
CPU hours were required for the optimization process using 4-features compared to 20 CPU hours 
for the single feature.   
XI. Concluding Remarks 
A two-stage hybrid optimization scheme was discussed aimed at optimizing physical pa-
rameters in a reaction mechanism that is used in profile simulations of high aspect ratio plasma 
etching into a SiO 2 substrate using a C 4F6/Ar/O2 gas mixture.  The process was performed in a 
dual frequency capacitively coupled plasma reactor with independently controlled high frequency 
and low frequency powers applied to the bottom electrode.  The optimization scheme consisted of 
consecutive  execution of finite difference gradient descent  (GD) and Nelder-Mead (NM) algo-
rithms.  Doing so enabled taking advantage of some of the desirable qualities of each method while 
 
Figure  20: Final feature grids after etch completion for different parameter sets as a function of epochal 
evolution and the actual experimental target feature. 
 
 
F 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

33 
 
at least partially negating some of their respective drawbacks.  The fast, initial descent of the GD 
method was maintained while its instability was dampened by the su bsequent NM process.  The 
reaction mechanism was optimized to best represent the geometric properties of a final etched 
feature extracted from scanning electron microscopy images .  Using appropriate target metrics, 
the optimization produced a mechanism that was able to reproduce the experimental reference with 
sub-1% error based on the metrics  describing the feature .  Performing the optimization process 
using multiple features improved the stability of the method. 
 The transferability of the mechanism was tested by applying the mechanism to etch pro-
cesses outside the training parameter space using different gas compositions and low frequency 
power.  The mechanism captured the relevant trends.  In a variation of the O2/C4F6 ratio, the mech-
anism reproduced the onset of feature clogging and, to a lesser degree, trends in necking and mask 
erosion.  Similarly, a variation of the low frequency power produced a comparable onset of clog-
ging at low power which was also captured by the mechanism.  Trends in feature etch rate (or lack 
thereof) are reproduced to a lesser degree. 
 Overall, the optimization process described here to refine physics parameters in a  plasma 
etch mechanism shows promise in that with a limited set of data  transferable physics parameters 
were produced.  Using a single SEM image, the process produced a mechanism that  was able to 
reproduce a good match to the training target and was able to reproduce relevant trends outside of 
its immediate training regime .  This degree of success is a consequence of the physics informed 
optimization approach.  A base mechanism that already contained explicit formulations of the rel-
evant physical processes was refined by the optimization process.  As a consequence the outcome 
is more universally applicable than the singular case to which it was matched. 
Improvements to this proof of concept study includes a more effective criterion for the 
algorithm switching between GD and NM , and a robust formulation to detect convergence and 
initiate an early termination of the optimization process to reduce unnecessary compute overhead. 
Further parallelization may reduce the time to completion while possibly increasing the total re-
quired computational cost .  This could be implemented by parallelizing execution of individual 
MCFPM instances or parallel execution of an ensemble of single features.  Another potential im-
provement is the expansion of the metrics to include not only a single process condition but rather 
match to one or more parametric sweeps , improving the overall statistical quality and physical 
validity.  Additional geometrical feature metrics could be add ed to better define the features, or 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

34 
 
replace the finite feature metrics with image -to-image comparisons.  The latter could leverage 
image-to-image translation techniques that have developed for image processing.  Alternatively, 
the inclusion of multiple features per process condition  could prove useful to include statistical 
variance and prevent overfitting, which is of great concern whenever only a small set of data is 
used.   
 
Data Availability 
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
The authors have no conflicts of interest. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by Tokyo Electron Ltd. and Samsung Electronics  Co.  These 
results were also based upon work supported by the U.S.  Department of Energy, Office of Science, 
Office of Fusion Energy Sciences under award number DE-SC0020232. 
  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

35 
 
References 
[1] V. M. Donnelly and A. Kornblit J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film. 31, 050825 
(2013) 
[2] I. Adamovich, S. D. Baalrud, A. Bogaerts, P. J. Bruggeman, et al J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys.  
50, 323001 (2017) 
[3] G. Packard, A. Rosenfeld, G. S. Oehrlein and S. Hamaguchi Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 
27, 023001 (2018) 
[4] Y. Suzuki, S. Iwashita, T. Sato, H. Yonemichi, H. Moki and T. Moriya, "Machine Learning 
Approaches for Process Optimization,"  2018 International Symposium on Semiconductor 
Manufacturing (ISSM), Tokyo, Japan, 2018, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/ISSM.2018.8651142. 
[5] R. Anirudh, R. Archibald, M. S. Asif, M. M. Becker, et al IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 51, 1750 
(2023) 
[6] Y. G. Yook, H. S. You, J. H. Park, W. S. Chang, et al J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys.  55, 255202 
(2022) 
[7] D. Zhang, S. Rauf and T. Sparks IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 30, 114–5 (2002) 
[8] D. Zhang, S. Rauf, T. G. Sparks and P. L. G. Ventzek J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B  21, 828–36 
(2003) 
[9] T. Iwase, Y. Kamaji, S. Y. Kang, K. Koga, et al Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58 SE0802 (2019) 
[10] N. Kuboi Journal of Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology, 22, 041502 (2023) 
[11] J. A. Sethian and D. Adalsteinsson IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 10, 167 (1997) 
[12] M. Chopra, S. Helpert, R. Verma, Z. Zhang, X. Zhu, and R. Bonnecaze, "A model -based, 
Bayesian approach to the CF 4/Ar etch of SiO 2," Proc. SPIE 10588, Design -Process-Tech-
nology Co -optimization for Manufacturability XII, 105880G (20 March 
2018); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2297482 
[13] T. Shimada, T. Yagisawa and T. Makabe Japanese J. Appl. Physics, Part 2 Lett.  45, L132 
(2006) 
[14] H. Tsuda, Y. Takao, K. Eriguchi and K. Ono Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 51, 08HC01 (2012) 
[15] S. Huang, C. Huard, S. Shim, S. K. Nam, et al J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 37, 031304 (2019) 
[16] C. M. Huard, Y. Zhang, S. Sriraman, A. Paterson, et al J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 35, 031306 
(2017) 
[17] H. Tsuda, K. Eriguchi, K. Ono and H. Ohta Appl. Phys. Express 2, 116501 (2009) 
[18] N. A. Mauchamp and S. Hamaguchi J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 40, 53004 (2022) 
[19] C. M. Huard, S. Sriraman, A. Paterson and M. J. Kushner J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 36, 06B101 
(2018) 
[20] C. Qu, Y. Sakiyama, P. Agarwal and M. J. Kushner J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 39, 52403 (2021) 
[21] R. Dussart, R. Ettouri, J. Nos, G. Antoun, et al J. Appl. Phys. 133, 113306 (2023) 
[22] G. Antoun, T. Tillocher, P. Lefaucheux, J. Faguet, et al Sci. Reports 11, 357 (2021) 
[23] R. Dussart, T. Tillocher, P. Lefaucheux and M. Boufnichel J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys.  47, 
123001 (2014) 
[24] A. Mesbah and D. B. Graves J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 52, 30LT02 (2019) 
[25] A. D. Bonzanini, K. Shao, D. B. Graves, S. Hamaguchi, et al Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 
32, 024003 (2023) 
[26] J. Moyne and J. Iskandar Process 5, 39 (2017) 
[27] D. Gidon, D. B. Graves and A. Mesbah Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 26, 085005 (2017) 
[28] T. F. Edgar, S. W. Butler, W. J. Campbell, C. Pfeiffer, et al Automatica 36, 1567 (2000) 
[29] M. Hankinson, T. Vincent, K. B. Irani and P. P. Khargonekar IEEE Trans. Semicond. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

36 
 
Manuf. 10, 121 (1997) 
[30] D. Stokes and G. S. May IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 13, 469 (2000) 
[31] J. H. Xia, Rusli and A. S. Kumta IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 38, 142 (2010) 
[32] W. Q. Xiong, Y. Qiao, L. P. Bai, M. Ghahramani, et al IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 34, 
207 (2021) 
[33] J. H. Xia, Rusli and A. Kumta IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 38, 1091 (2010) 
[34] C. E. Davis and G. S. May IEEE Trans. Electron. Packag. Manuf. 31, 104 (2008) 
[35] P. Seleson, M. Mustafa, D. Curreli, C. D. Hauck, et al Comput. Phys. Commun. 279, 108436 
(2022) 
[36] T. Gergs, B. Borislavov and J. Trieschmann J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 40, 12802 (2022) 
[37] G. Dong, X. Wei, J. Bao, G. Brochard, et al Nucl. Fusion 61, 126061 (2021) 
[38] S. Morosohk and E. Schuster Contrib. to Plasma Phys. 63, e202200153 (2023) 
[39] C. Ma, B. Zhu, X. Q. Xu and W. Wang Phys. Plasmas 27, 42502 (2020) 
[40] A. Merlo, D. Böckenhoff, J. Schilling, U. Höfel, et al Nucl. Fusion 61, 096039 (2021) 
[41] J. C. Martínez-Loyola, A. A. Siller-Ceniceros, M. E. Sánchez-Castro, et al Nucl. Fusion 62, 
126067 (2022) 
[42] P. Rodriguez -Fernandez, A. E. White, A. J. Creely, M. J. Greenwald, et al Fusion Sci. 
Technol. 74, 65 (2018) 
[43] S. Dasbach and S. Wiesen Nucl. Mater. Energy 34, 101396 (2023) 
[44] Y. Kim, S. Lee, T. Jung, B. Lee, N. Kwak, S. Park, "Challenges in high-aspect ratio contact 
(HARC) etching for DRAM capacitor formation," Proc. SPIE 9428, Advanced Etch Tech-
nology for Nanopatterning IV, 942806 (17 March 
2015); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2087765 
[45] Y. Yang and Y. Xu J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 41, 52602 (2023) 
[46] M. Omura, J. Hashimoto, T. Adachi, Y. Kondo, et al Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SEEB02 (2019) 
[47] K. J. Owen, B. VanDerElzen, R. L. Peterson and K. Najafi, "High aspect ratio deep silicon 
etching," 2012 IEEE 25th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS), Paris, France, 2012, pp. 251-254, doi: 10.1109/MEMSYS.2012.6170138. 
[48] B. Wu, A. Kumar and S. Pamarthy J. Appl. Phys. 108, 51101 (2010) 
[49] S. Huang, S. Shim, S. K. Nam and M. J. Kushner J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 38, 023001 (2020) 
[50] Z. Hu, H. Shao, J. Li, P. Lai, et al J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 41, 63113 (2023) 
[51] J. Bobinac, T. Reiter, J. Piso, X. Klemenschits, et al Micromachines 14, 665 (2023) 
[52] R. P. Brinkmann J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 44, 042002 (2011) 
[53] W. Park, J. Han, S. Park and S. Y. Moon Vacuum 216, 112466 (2023) 
[54] X. Xiao, X. Ke, B. Su and H.-Y. Zhang ECS Trans. 104, 201 (2021) 
[55] T. Matsushita, T. Matsumoto, H. Mukai, S. Kyoh, K. Hashimoto, "Dry etch challenges for 
CD shrinkage in memory process," Proc. SPIE 9428, Advanced Etch Technology for Na-
nopatterning IV, 942807 (17 March 2015); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2085628 
[56] A. A. Kaptanoglu, K. D. Morgan, C. J. Hansen and S. L. Brunton Phys. Rev. E 104, 015206 
(2021) 
[57] E. P. Alves and F. Fiuza Phys. Rev. Research 4,, 033192 (2022) 
[58] K. Willcox and J. Peraire AIAA Journal 40, 2323 (2002) 
[59] Y. Xing, M. A. Gosálvez, K. Sato, M. Tian, et al J. Micromechanics Microengineering 22, 
085020 (2012) 
[60] M. A. Goslvez, N. Ferrando, Y. Xing, P. Pal, et al J. Micromechanics Microengineering 21, 
065017 (2011) 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

37 
 
[61] Y. Li, Y. Xing, M. A. Gosálvez, P. Pal and Y. Zhou, "Particle swarm optimization of model 
parameters: Simulation of deep reactive ion etching by the continuous cellular automa-
ton," 2013 Transducers & Eurosensors XXVII: The 17th International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS & EUROSENSORS XXVII) , 
Barcelona, Spain, 2013, pp. 1087-1090, doi: 10.1109/Transducers.2013.6626960. 
[62] C. -C. Liu, Y. Li, Y. -S. Yang, C. -Y. Chen and M. -H. Chuang, "Automatic Device Model 
Parameter Extractions via Hybrid Intelligent Methodology," 2020 International Conference 
on Simulation of Semiconductor Processes and Devices (SISPAD), Kobe, Japan, 2020, pp. 
355-358, doi: 10.23919/SISPAD49475.2020.9241613. 
[63] T. Xiao and D. Ni Process. 9, 151 (2021) 
[64] M. S. Daoud, M. Shehab, H. M. Al-Mimi, L. Abualigah, et al Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 
30, 2431 (2022) 
[65] M. Jalalitabar, I. G. Tsoulos, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, et al Math. 11, 682 (2023) 
[66] L. Zhou, X. Zhou, C. A. Yi, L. Zhou, et al Electron. 12, 994 (2023) 
[67] S. Takenaga, Y. Ozaki and M. Onishi Optim. Lett. 17, 283 (2023) 
[68] Z. Huang, S. Yan, and M. Rosenbusch, "Optimizing ion transport in a multi-reflection time-
of-flight mass spectrograph by a modified Nelder --Mead simplex algorithm" Authorea. 
August 21, 2023. DOI: 10.22541/au.169265002.28126249/v1 
[69] M. J. Kushner J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys.42, 194013 (2009) 
[70] T. Piskin, Y. Qian, P. Pribyl, W. Gekelman, et al J. Appl. Phys. 133, 173302 (2023) 
[71] C. Qu, S. J. Lanham, S. C. Shannon, S. K. Nam, et al J. Appl. Phys. 127, 133302 (2020) 
[72] M. Shen, T. Lill, J. Hoang, H. Chi, et al Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023) 
[73] H. J. M. Shi, M. Qiming Xuan, F. Oztoprak and J. Nocedal Optim. Methods Softw. 38, 289 
(2023) 
[74] E. J. Paul, M. Landreman and T. Antonsen J. Plasma Phys. 87 905870214 (2021) 
[75] D. Shin and S. J. Hong J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 41, 64002 (2023) 
[76] J. A. Désidéri Comptes Rendus Math. 350, 313 (2012) 
[77] S. Ruder (2016), https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747 .  
[78] R. R. Barton and J. S. Ivey Management Science 42, 954 (1996) 
[79] K. R. Mahmoud Electromagnetics 31, 578 (2011) 
[80] I. Fajfar, Á. Bűrmen and J. Puhan Optim. Lett. 13, 1011 (2019) 
[81] C. Audet and C. Tribes Comput. Optim. Appl. 71, 331 (2018) 
[82] M. A. Luersen and R. Le Riche Comput. Struct. 82, 2251 (2004) 
[83] Y. Ozaki, M. Yano and M. Onishi IPSJ Trans. Comput. Vis. Appl. 9, 1 (2017) 
[84] Y. Lee, A. Resiga, S. Yi and C. Wern J. Manuf. Mater. Process. 4, 66 (2020) 
[85] E. Zahara and Y. T. Kao Expert Syst. Appl. 36, 3880 (2009) 
 
 
 
  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

38 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Base Case Fluxes to Wafer 
Table 2: High-level description of the SiO2 and AC etch mechanism 
Table 3: Tuning parameters for optimization 
Table 4:Target metrics for optimization 
Table 5: Final tuning parameters after coupled optimization 
 
 
  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554

39 
 
Figures Captions 
1. Global schematic of the optimization process.  
2. CCP reactor geometry and circuit. 
3. Plasma properties for the base case:  (a) Electron density [e], (b) electron temperature T e, (c) 
negative fluorine ion density [F -], (d) ionization rate by bulk electrons and (e) ionization rate 
by secondary electrons. 
4. Inputs for feature profile simulation:  a) Ion energy and angular distribution (IEAD) incident 
onto the wafer.  b) Initial feature geometry (not to scale) consisting of a SiO2 substrate with an 
amorphous carbon mask. 
5. Schematic of the crosslink mechanism shown here in 2 dimensions.  a) incident particle, b) 
deposition, c) crosslink availability, d) change in properties, e) energetic particle bombard-
ment, f) bond breaking, g) change in properties.   
6. Etch features for different O based polymer etch probabilities of  a) 0.005 and b) 0.02. 
7. Feature specifications. a) Target metrics used to evaluate the experimental matching. b) SEM 
image from the base case experiment used for evaluation of the model. 
8. Outline of the gradient descent method for a 1D parameter space. 
9. Results from the gradient descent optimization for etch parameters as a function of epoch.  a) 
Minimal epochal loss, b) values of select metrics as a function of epochs and c) select model 
parameters as a function of epochs. 
10. The finite resolution of the loss function leads to convergence issues. 
11. Evolution of the total loss for different learning rates η = 110-4, 510-4, 110-3 and 510-3. 
12. Examples of the geometric transformations of the parameter simplex in a 2D parameter space; 
reflection, extension; contraction; shrinkage. 
13. Flow chart describing the Nelder-Mead optimization algorithm 
14. Results from the combined gradient descent and Nelder -Mead optimization. a) Minimal ep-
ochal loss, b) values of select metrics as a function of epochs and c) select model parameters 
as a function of epochs. 
15. Final features after etch completion for different parameter sets as a function of epochal evo-
lution and the actual experimental target feature. 
16. Parametric data for application of derived parameters to other etch conditions. a) Fluxes inci-
dent on the wafer surface as a function or the O 2/C4F6 feedstock gas ratio. b) IEADs onto the 
wafer resulting for the low frequency power PLF = 0, 4, 6 and 8 kW. 
17. Variation of oxygen in O 2/C4F6 gas mixtures:  a) Predicted features. b) SEM images of the 
features resulting from the corresponding experiments. 
18. Variation of low frequency power.  a) Predicted features. b) SEM images of the features re-
sulting from the corresponding experiments. 
19. 19: Results of the feature array optimization.  a) Minimal epochal loss, b) values of select 
metrics as a function of epochs and c) select model parameters as a function of epochs. 
20. Final feature grids after etch completion for different parameter sets as a function of epochal 
evolution and the actual experimental target feature.  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1116/6.0003554
