1 
 
Voltage Waveform Tailoring for High Aspect Ratio Plasma Etching of SiO2 using 
Ar/CF4/O2 Mixtures:  Consequences of Ion and Electron Distributions on Etch Profiles 
 
Florian Krüger1, Hyunjae Lee2, Sang Ki Nam2, and Mark J. Kushner1,3 
 
1 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of Michigan, 1301 Beal 
Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2122 USA  fkrueger@umich.edu, mjkush@umich.edu 
2 Mechatronics R&D Center, Sams ung Electronics Co., Ltd., 1-1 Samsungjeonja-ro, Hwaseong-
si, Gyeonggi-do 18448, South Korea  hj0928.lee@samsung.com, sangki.j.nam@samsung.com 
3 Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. 
 
Abstract: 
The quality of high aspect ratio (HAR) features etched into dielectrics for microelectronics 
fabrication using halogen containing low temperature plasmas strongly depends on the energy and 
angular distribution of the incident ions (IEAD) onto the wafer , as well as potentially that of the 
electrons (EEAD).  Positive ions, accelerated to high energies by the sheath electric field, have 
narrow angular spreads and can penetrate deeply into HAR features.  Electrons typically arrive at 
the wafer with nearly thermal energy and isotropic angular dist ributions and so do not directly 
penetrate deeply into features.  These differences can lead to charging of the insides of the features 
which can slow etching rates and produce geometric defects such  as twisting.  In this work, we 
computationally investigated the plasma etching of HAR features into SiO2 using tailored voltage 
waveforms in a geometrically asymmetric capacitively coupled plasma sustained in an Ar/CF4/O2 
mixture at 40 mTorr.  The tailored waveform consisted of a sinu soidal wave and its higher har-
monics with a fundamental frequenc y of 1 MHz.  We found that so me degree of control of the 
IEADs and EEADs is possible by adjusting the phase of higher harmonics φ through the resulting 
generation of electrical asymmetry and electric field reversal.   However, the IEADs and EEADs 
cannot easily be separately contr olled.  The control of IEADs a nd EEADs are inherently linked.  
The highest quality feature wa s obtained with a phase angle φ = 0° as this value generated the 
largest (most negative) DC self-bias and largest electric field  reversal for accelerating electrons 
into the feature.  That said, the consequences of voltage wavef orm tailoring (VWT) on etched 
features is dominated by the change in the IEADs.  Although VWT  does produce EEADs with 
higher energy and narrower angular spread, the effect of these electrons on the feature compared 
to thermal electrons is not large.  This smaller impact of VWT produced EEADs is attributed to 
thermal electrons being accelerated into the feature by electric fields produced by the positive in-
feature charging.   
 
Keywords: Voltage Waveform Tailoring, Plasma Etching, High Aspect Ratio Etch-
ing, Electric Field Reversal, Plasma Sheath 
  
2 
 
I. Introduction 
Plasma etching of dielectrics, such as SiO2, is an integral step in manufacture of micro- and 
nanometer scale electronics [1-4].  The particular process of etching high aspect ratio (HAR) fea-
tures is becoming an increasingly critical process due to the complexity of 3-dimensional structures 
such as 3D-NAND memory.  Fabricating these devices require etching HAR contact holes through 
hundreds of layers of SiO 2 and Si3N4 with a total aspect ratio of up to 100 [5-7] with increasing 
densities of features.  These highly anisotropic etches are ach ieved with energetic ion bombard-
ment with near normal angles of in cidence onto the wafer.  In c apacitively coupled plasmas 
(CCPs), which are commonly used for plasma etching of dielectrics, the anisotropy of the positive 
ions is a consequence of acceleration of the ions in the electr ic field in the sheath bounding the 
wafer.  The majority of HAR etching of dielectrics is performed in CCPs sustained in fluorocarbon 
gas mixtures, typically using multiple radio frequency (RF) power supplies having frequencies of 
a few MHz to tens of MHz [7-10]   These discharges are usually o perated with gas pressures of 
tens of mTorr with hundreds of watts to many kW of power deposi tion over a 30 cm diameter 
wafer.  These conditions produce ion fluxes to the wafer of 10 15-1016 cm-2s-1 [11].  Ions (or hot 
neutrals after ion scattering from the inner sidewalls of featu res) reaching the bottom of HAR 
features must have a critically high energy and narrow angular distribution to continue the etch.  
To achieve these goals, substrate biases having voltages of many kV are regularly used [11-14]. 
In single frequency electropositive RF discharges, the bulk pla sma potential is generally 
positive with respect to bounding surfaces, leading to an electric field in the sheath above the wafer 
that points towards the wafer surface during most of the RF cyc le [15-16].  This electric field 
accelerates positive ions into the wafer with high energies and narrow angular spreads, while con-
fining the electrons to the bulk plasma.  It is only during a small fraction of the RF cycle at which 
time the sheath collapses that electron fluxes are able to reach the wafer [17-18].  (By sheath col-
lapse, we refer to the sheath potential rapidly decreasing to small values.)  The highly anisotropic, 
high energy ions can penetrate deeply into HAR features.  The electrons incident onto the wafer 
typically have nearly thermal ene rgy and angularly broad distributions, and so do not naturally 
penetrate deeply into features [1].  When etching dielectric (o r low conductivity materials), these 
conditions can result in the low er echelons of the feature being charged positively and the upper 
echelons being charged negatively [19].  This differential charging generates electric field compo-
nents within the feature [19-21].  The intra-feature electric fields can deviate ion trajectories which 
3 
 
can lead to undesired consequences including mask deformation [ 22,23], a reduction of the ion 
flux at the bottom of the feature [24], and profile distortion such as notching, twisting and bowing 
[19-21].  Negative charging of the mask, a process that is sens ensitive to the incident energy dis-
ributions of both electrons and ions, may then also produce deviations in the trajectories of incident 
charged particles [22,23].  
The issue of differential charging has previously been addressed by increasing the ion en-
ergies to minimize the deflection of ions by intra-feature elec tric fields.  However, this approach 
must overcome several challenges.  The coinciding increase in t h e  p o w e r d e n s i ty  a t th e  w a f e r 
surface can lead to excessive wafer heating which, unchecked, can stress the thermal budget of the 
process [8,25].  In high volume manufacturing (HVM) this strategy requires the use of technolog-
ically complex wafer cooling.  Although successful to date, power onto the wafer and wafer cool-
ing has their limits. 
Since the desired increase in ion energy is often achieved by increasing the applied voltage 
to the substrate, another challe nge arises in that the sheath t hickness is a function of the sheath 
voltage and by extension the CCP voltage applied to the substrate.  Increasing the sheath thickness 
for otherwise the same process conditions will lead to an incre ase in the number of collisions in 
the pre-sheath and sheath, producing a lower energy and broader  angular distribution of the inci-
dent ion flux.  The higher ion energies can also decrease selec tivity of the dielectric etch with 
respect to the mask as the result of an increase in non-selecti ve physical sputtering of the mask.  
Maintaining high selectivity is critical during the typically long etch times required for HAR fea-
tures [1,8].  
In a typical CCP of the type used for plasma etching in microelectronics fabrication (pres-
sures of tens of mTorr, frequencies of 1 – 100 MHz), the net ch arged particle flux to surfaces in 
contact with the plasma must sum to zero over the RF cycle in the steady state,   
 
0
() () 0
T
ei tt d t      (1) 
where, T is the RF period. Γe(t) and Γi(t) are the time dependent fluxes to the surface of electrons 
and positive ions, acknowledging that the flux of negative ions  is negligible in the absence of 
pulsing.  The electric fields in the sheath and presheath usually point towards surfaces to accelerate 
ions out of the plasma and to confine electrons.  It is only during a small portion of the anodic part 
of the RF cycle that the sheath voltage decreases sufficiently to allow electrons to reach the 
4 
 
substrate.  These electrons arrive at the substrate with largely thermal, isotropic velocity distribu-
tions. 
  Voltage waveform tailoring (VWT ) is a technique that is able to provide additional flexi-
bility in producing ion energy and angular distributions (IEADs) onto the wafer [26].  VWT can 
also be used to generate direc tional (anisotropic), high energy electron fluxes onto the substrate 
through promoting an electric field reversal (EFR) in the presheath above the substrate [17].  EFR 
refers to the electric field in the presheath momentarily point ing into the plasma, as opposed to 
pointing towards the surface.  In VWT, a non-sinusoidal voltage is applied to the substrate, typi-
cally using several harmonics of a fundamental frequency.  EFR in the presheath ultimately results 
from the requirement that the time average of positive and negative fluxes to the substrate must 
balance.  Only during the sheath collapse during the anodic par t of the cycle are electrons able to 
diffuse to the surface.  Under certain conditions, this diffusive electron transport may not be suffi-
cient to satisfy the local charge balance.  These conditiosn in clude short sheath collapse times, 
thick sheaths or magnetically or collisionally hindered transpo rt.  For these conditions, negative 
space charge in the presheath produces an EFR, which slows the transport of ions and increases 
the transport of electrons towar ds the wafer.  Electric field reversal has been observed computa-
tionally as well as experimentally [17, 27-30].  In the context  of VWT, EFR it was found to be 
most prevalent when using waveforms that facilitate a rapid and brief sheath collapse [17, 26].  
 With its ability to produce anisotropic IEADs which naturally penetrate deeply into HAR 
features, and electron energy and angular distributions (EEADs) onto the substrate which can po-
tentially penetrate deeply into HAR features, VWT has been prop osed as a (partial) remedy for 
neutralizing charging inside HAR features [17,26].  Other techn iques can also be used to inject 
high energy electrons into features.  For example, the top elec trode of CCPs can be biased with a 
negative DC voltage, which produces a high energy beam of anisotropic electrons onto the wafer 
[31].  This technique would require an additional power supply and its associated complexities.  
The use of tailored waveforms does increase complexity in terms of power supply, harmonic filters 
and match box designs [32].  The DC generated electron-beam sol ution requires a counter elec-
trode and so would not be easily implemented into inductively c oupled plasma (ICP) systems, 
whereas the VWT solution is, in principle, applicable to the bi as in ICP systems.  Ultimately, the 
choice of the most expedient system will likely be application dependent.   
 In principle, if the flux of positive ions and negative electr ons arriving on the wafer and 
5 
 
reaching the lower echelons of the features can be balanced ove r the RF cycle, the detrimental 
effects of intra-feature charging can be avoided.  That said, t he production of the EFR that accel-
erates electrons into the wafer and narrows the EEAD requires m anipulating the sheath potential 
during the RF cycle and so the IEADs are also affected.  As a r esult, independent control of the 
energy and angular distributions (EADs) of both electrons and ions is challenging.  From a practi-
cal perspective in an actual CCP etching tool, it is not possib le to hold the IEAD constant while 
varying the EEAD using VWT. 
The dynamics of VWT, and EFR in particular, are sensitive to the geometry of the plasma 
reactor and the electronegativity  of the plasma.  (Electronegat ivity refers to the ratio of negative 
ions to electrons. Highly electronegative plasmas have a large ratio of negative ions to electrons, 
while the RF cycle averaged plasma potential and floating potential are still positive.)  For exam-
ple, one of the features of VWT is the electrical asymmetry effect (EAE) in which the dc bias in a 
symmetric, multi-frequency CCP can be controlled by the amplitu de and phase of the harmonics 
used in the bias waveform [33,34].  The plasma reactors used in HVM are typically geometrically 
asymmetric and produce a negative DC bias on the substrate on this basis alone.  Using VWT, the 
DC bias resulting from the EAE then either decreases or increases the geometrically produced DC 
bias.  Electronegative plasmas further complicate the VWT produ ced EAE and EFR as space 
charge is maintained by far less mobile negative ions compared to electrons.  
In this paper we discuss results from a computational investiga tion of a  multi-frequency 
CCP sustained in an Ar/CF 4/O2 mixture using a geometry similar to those found in HVM.  High 
frequency power applied to the top electrode is used to sustain  the plasma while VWT is used to 
define the low-frequency bias vol tage applied to the bottom ele ctrode.  The consequences of the 
electrical asymmetry effect and the electric field reversal on the IEADs and EEADs onto the wafer 
surface are discussed.  The resulting charged and neutral particle fluxes and distributions are then 
used in self-consistent simulations of etching a HAR feature into SiO2 to investigate the ability of 
VWT to control feature properties.   
We found that in spite of the complicating factors of geometry,  gas mixture and multiple 
frequencies, VWT allowed for effective control of IEADs and EEADs onto the wafer, though this 
control could not be produced independently.  Optimizing the wa veform to produce a desired 
EEAD inevitably affects the IEAD.  Peak and mean energies of positive ions and of electrons onto 
the wafer are strong functions of the shape of the applied volt age waveform.  With the narrow 
6 
 
angle and energetic EEADs produced by VWT, our investigation di d show a decrease in intra-
feature charging, as measured by a decrease in the positive ele ctrical potential.  However, the 
overall characteristics of the final etch feature was dominated by the ion dynamics.   
Synthetic changes to only the EEADs resulted in minor changes of the final etched feature.  
For example, there were not significant differences in feature quality between an isotropic, thermal 
EEAD onto the wafer corresponding to an electron temperature of a 3-4 eV, and the narrow, ener-
getic EEAD produced by VWT.  We attribute this result to the fa ct that thermal electrons are 
accelerated into the feature by the electric fields produced by  the positive, in-feature electric po-
tential.  Ultimately, in a quasi-steady state, the flux of positive and negative charge into the feature 
must be equal.  This is achieved by producing a positive potential in the feature, which then accel-
erates thermal electrons into the feature.  The narrow energetic EEADs produced by VWT are also 
accelerated into the feature.  However, their initially higher wafer directed velocities require a 
smaller positive potential in the feature to achieve the needed  flux balance.  The end result is a 
decrease in the intra-feature potential relative to that produc ed with thermal electrons that is ap-
proximately equal to the average energy of the VWT produced EEAD. 
The computational platform used for the reactor scale plasma transport, the Hybrid Plasma 
Equipment Model (HPEM) and the reactor conditions are discussed  in Sec. II.  The Monte Carlo 
Feature Profile Model (MCFPM) used for the feature scale simulations of etching, and its applica-
tion here, are described in Sec. III.  The influence of phase a ngle φ of the voltage waveform on 
charged particle distributions onto the wafer and etch profiles with low bias power is discussed in 
Sec. IV and with high bias power is discussed in Sec. V.  Concluding remarks are in Sec. VI. 
 
II. Description of the Reactor Scale Model 
The investigation of the reactor scale plasma dynamics was perf ormed using the Hybrid 
Plasma Equipment Model (HPEM), which is described in detail in Ref. [35].  In short, the HPEM 
is a 2-dimensional hydrodynamic model which resolves plasma phe nomena in a time-slicing ap-
proach.  Different physics regimes are addressed in modules that are coupled by exchanging phys-
ical quantities – electric and magnetic fields, densities, rate coefficients.  The major modules used 
in this work are the Fluid Kinetics-Poisson Module (FKPM), the Electron Energy Transport Mod-
ule (EETM), and the Plasma Chemistry Monte Carlo Module (PCMCM).   
In the FKPM, the continuity, momentum, and energy equations of the heavy particles are 
7 
 
solved coincidently with Poisson’s equation to provide heavy pa rticle densities, fluxes and elec-
trostatic potential.  Electron densities and fluxes in the bulk plasma are addressed using continnum, 
fluid techniques in the FKPM.  In the EETM, the spatially dependent electron energy distributions 
(EEDs) in the plasma are obtaine d using a kinetic, Monte Carlo based approach using the space 
and phase resolved electric fields produced in the FKPM [36].  These EEDs are then used to pro-
duce electron impact rate coefficients and transport coefficien ts for use in the FKPM.  The tra-
jetories of secondary electrons produced by ion impact and exci ted state impact on surfaces are 
addressed using fully kinetic, Monte Carlo techniques in the EETM.  The energy and angular dis-
tribution of electrons striking the substrate are recorded in the EETM, which are then used as input 
to the MCFPM.  The EEDs for both bulk and secondary electrons are continuously updated during 
the simulation by repeatedly executing the EETM.  
After the plasma reaches a quasi-steady state the PCMCM, using Monte Carlo techniques, 
tracks the trajectories of ions and reactive neutral species.  EADs of these species are recorded 
impinging onto the wafer and are used as input to the MCFPM.  The reaction mechanism used for 
Ar/O2/CF4 plasmas is described by Vasenkov et al [37,38].  That reaction mechanism has been 
modified by updating the model fo r Ar excited states to include  the processes described in [39]. 
Ion induced secondary electron emission coefficients on surfaces in contact wtih the plasmas was 
included using coefficients of 0.15 and 0.05 for wafer and meta ls.  Excited Ar species induce 
secondary electron emission with a probability of 0.01 on all surfaces [40].  
A schematic of the cylindrically symmetric CCP reactor used in this investigation is shown 
in Fig 1.  The reactor, modeled after multi-frequency CCPs used  in industrial HVM applications, 
consists of two parallel plate electrodes with a diameter of 300 mm separated by a 2.8 cm gap.  A 
silicon wafer is mounted on the bottom electrode and a showerhe ad gas inlet is distributed across 
the top electrode.  A focus ring made of silicon and quartz to improve discharge uniformity sur-
rounds the wafer.  The dielectri c constants of these components  are ε/ε0 = 4 for the outer quartz 
ring and ε/ε0 = 11.8 for the Si ring.  While the conductivity of the quartz i s negligible, that of the 
Si wafer is 0.05/Ω-cm .  The feedstock gas Ar/CF 4/O2 = 75,/15/10 flows at 500 sccm through the 
top electrode.  The reactor pressure is held constant at 40 mTo rr at the location of the pressure 
sensor near the pump port by throttling the rate of pumping.  
The VWT power supply is connected to the bottom electrode through a blocking capacitor 
of 500 nF.  In principle, in the quasi-steady state, the DC bias should be independent of the value 
8 
 
of the blocking capacitor provided that the RC time constant of the plasma-capacitor series imped-
ance is large compared to transients in current.  The capacitan ce used here is a balance of there 
being an acceptably short charging time and long enough RC time constant so that there is little 
variation in the DC bias during the RF cycle.  
Sheath properties are in part a function of plasma density at t he edge of the sheath which 
then determines sheath thickness.  To maintain a relatively con stant plasma density and to mini-
mize sheath variation based on changes in plasma density, 500 W  is coupled into the plasma 
through the top electrode using a sinusoidal voltage waveform with a frequency of 80 MHz.  This 
power was maintained by continually adjusting the amplitude of the voltage at 80 MHz. 
To control the dynamics of charged particles impinging on the wafer surface, a customized 
voltage waveform, V(t), was applied to the bottom electrode.  The waveform consists of a funda-
mental sine wave with a frequency f0 = 1 MHz and 4 consecutive higher harmonics, 
 00
1
1() c o s ( 2 )()
N
k
i
NkVt V k ft kNN k  

  . (2) 
Here, V0 is the total applied voltage amplitude, k is the harmonic order, N is the total number of 
frequencies, and the relative phase shift of each harmonic freq uency k is φ k..  In this work the 
number of harmonics is N = 5.  The consequences of VWT were investigated by varying the phase 
shift of the even harmonics φ for k = 2, 4.  The resulting waveforms are shown in Fig. 2 for phase 
shifts of φ = 0°, 45°, 90°, 135° and 180°.  The power coupled through the b ottom electrode, P0, 
was initially held constant at 1 kW by adjusting V0.  
 
III. Description of the Feature Scale Model 
 The EADs sampled at the substr ate surface were used as input to the Monte Carlo Feature 
Profile Model (MCFPM) to simulate the evolution of etch features in semiconductor device mate-
rials [40,41,42].  Briefly, MCFPM is a voxel based, kinetic model in which pseudo-particles rep-
resenting gas phase species are launched with energies and angl es sampled from the EADs ob-
tained from the HPEM.  The trajectories of the incoming particles are integrated, with charged 
particles subject to acceleratio n by electric fields, until a c ollision with a surface occurs.  The 
specific surface reaction is chosen based on a stochastic Monte Carlo approach.  Depending on the 
reaction, the voxel representing the surface site is removed (p hysical or chemical sputtering), 
chemically modified (passivation) or a voxel is added on top of  the site (deposition).  Species 
9 
 
reflected from or produced at the surface, such as a sputter or chemical etch product, are returned 
to the gas phase, and their trajectories are tracked until they are consumed in a reaction at a surface 
or leave the feature.  Although the capability exists in the MC FPM to have electron stimulated 
surface chemistry or electron implantation, in this study, electrons do not modify the surface other 
than through depositing their charge. 
 In this study, we investigated the plasma etching of SiO
2 in a Ar/O 2/CF4 gas mixture.  A 
detailed description of the reaction mechanism is given by Huang et al. [40].  Generally, all in-
coming ions or hot neutrals resulting from neutralization of ions when striking surfaces can phys-
ically sputter every material according to the incident particles mass, angle and energy as well as 
the surface binding energy of the material.  Radical C
xFy species can lead to the deposition of 
polymer, the main contributor to sidewall passivation, which in turn is removed by sputtering and 
etching by oxygen radicals.  C xFy radicals can react with the SiO 2 surface to create a layer of 
SiO2CxFy complexes, significantly lowering the binding energy and making the complex easier to 
chemically sputter. 
 The electric potential in the feature was computed by collecti ng charge on surfaces and 
solving Poisson's equation.  The relative permittivity for SiO
2 used in solution of Poisson's equa-
tion was r = 4.0, and for photoresist, polymer and SiO2CxFy complexes was r = 3.0.  The electric 
potential then provides electric fields used to advance the tra jectories of charged particles.  All 
positive ions neutralized when striking a surface, and if reflected, continued as a neutral.  Electrons 
were collected on surfaces with unity probability.  For this st udy, the SiO 2 and photoresist had 
essentially zero conductivity (10 -10/- c m ) .   P o l y m e r  ( 510-6/-cm) and SiO 2CxFy complexes 
(110-6/-cm) had finite but small conductivity.  These conditions generally resulted in charge 
being resident only on surfaces, or buried under polymer or redeposited etch products if deposition 
occurred on top of charged surfaces.   
 The geometry used for the feature evolution is shown in Fig. 3.  The feature is a trench 
consisting of a 3000 nm thick SiO
2 layer over a Si stop-layer, covered by 100 nm thick photoresist 
with a 100 nm opening.  This geometry produces an aspect ratio of about 30 for an etched trench 
down to the stop layer.  The simulation was performed in 3-dime nsions as a finite depth trench.  
The mesh consists of 60 cells wide by 750 cells tall by 10 cells deep, producing cubic voxels with 
5 nm edge length.  Reflective boundary conditions are used along the y-axis normal to the geom-
etry shown in Fig. 2.  Although we are simulating a nominally 2 -dimensional feature (a trench), 
10 
 
performing the simulation in 3-dimensions results in a more rea listic representation of sidewall 
roughness.  When simulating a trench in 2-dimensions, sidewall roughness is effectively uniform 
(and infinite) in the unresolved depth.  In 3-dimensions, sidewall roughness is finite.  The etching 
was performed for a fixed time of 15 minutes.   
 The Monte-Carlo method which is used in the MCFPM inherently p roduces statistical var-
iation in the details of the features that are produced.  This run-to-tun variation can occur naturally 
in parallel computations by diffe rences in the timings of the p rocessors.  The statistical variation 
features can be demonstrated by changing the seeds for the random number generators on separate 
runs.  The features shown here are typical, average features in which outliers due to statistical 
variation have been excluded.  T he statistical run-to-run diffe rences in features are discussed in 
Appendix A. 
 
IV. Plasma and Etch Properties for 1000 W of VWT Power 
In industrial applications of plasma etching, it is most common to control power deposition 
in the plasma as opposed to voltage amplitude.  To make more direct connection to these applica-
tions, the power applied through the VWT on the bottom electrode was first held constant at P
VWT 
= 1000 W by adjusting the voltage amplitude V 0 while varying the phase φ from 0 – 180 o.  Alt-
hough this power appears large, by industrial processing standa rds for HAR etching of 30 cm 
diameter wafers, 1000 W is a moderately small power [40,43,44].  The applied voltage amplitudes 
necessary to maintain constant power coupling through the top electrode (500 W), bottom elec-
trode (P
VWT = 1000 W) and the resulting DC self-bias on the bottom electrode are shown in Fig. 4 
as a function of phase angle.  At constant power, the amplitude  of the high frequency voltage 
applied to the top electrode is a weak function of the phase an gle and is nearly constant at V HF = 
120 V.  The DC self-bias, however, is strongly coupled to φ with its magnitude decreasing (be-
coming more positive) by 88% from Vdc= -2480 at φ=0° to Vdc= -290 at φ=0°. 
 Earlier works have described th e trend of how DC bias depends of the shape of the applied 
waveform through the generation of the electrical asymmetry effect (EAE) [18,45].  The DC self-
bias can be expressed as 
 max min ,1
dc
VVV 

     (2) 
where Vmax and Vmin are the maximum and minimum of the applied voltage.   is the discharge 
11 
 
symmetry parameter given by 
 
2
,
ps p s g
g sg sp
A nI
A nI


  (2) 
where the areas of the powered and ground electrodes are Ap and Ag and the ion densities near the 
powered and grounded surfaces are spn  and sgn .  Isp and Isg are the sheath integrals, described in 
prior publications on the origin of the EAE [33, 34, 45].  In short, these are dimensionless quantities 
that depend only on the normalized profile of the sheath charge density.   
 The formulation for the EAE does not specifically account for a second powered electrode 
having a unique frequency, such as used here.  However, due to the higher frequency and lower 
power of this second RF bias, the voltage amplitude applied to the top electrode is smaller than 
that applied to the lower electrode.  Sinusoidal voltages alone do not induce electrical asymmetry 
effects and so we do not expect large perturbations to the EAE process by the high frequency 
source.  With the phase shift applying only to the tailored waveform on the bottom electrode, VHF 
remains relatively constant for all φ, varying by less than 10%.  Due to the changes to the electron 
dynamics in the sheath region so me variation does occur in V 0, decreasing from 2800 V to 2200 
V or about 27% from  = 0 to 180.   
The DC self-bias on the lower electrode, VDC, is an important parameter in determining the 
energy of incident positive ions.  For high frequency excitatio n where the energy width of the 
IEAD is small compared to the RF voltage amplitude, the centroid in energy of the IEAD typically 
increases with the magnitude of VDC.  With low fundamental frequencies (thin sheath limit), ions 
transiting the sheath respond to the sheath dynamics during the RF period.  (This is nearly always 
true for electrons.)  In this low frequency limit, the correlat ion between IEAD and V DC is not 
straight forward.   
The radially averaged axial electric field as a function of tim e and distance from the sub-
strate, Ez(z, t), is shown in Fig. 5 for phase shifts of φ = 0° to 180°.  In CCPs without an electric 
field reversal, Ez(z, t) near the bottom electrode s heath will point towards the electrode (negative 
z direction) at all times.  However, with φ = 0°, an EFR occurs during the sheath collapse at around 
0.5 μs when the applied voltage is at its maximum positive valu e and there is a positive electric 
field component (pointing in +z direction).  This EFR results, in part, from the short duration of 
the positive voltage excursion of the voltage waveform and the correspondingly short time during 
12 
 
which the sheath collapses.  In order to produce the required electron flux to the surface to maintain 
a charge-neutral flux to the substrate, an EFR occurs to accele rate electrons towards the surface.  
This field reversal is most pronounced in the φ = 0° case (69 V/cm) as this phase has the shortest 
sheath collapse and so requires the largest instantaneous electron flux to the surface.  As the dura-
tion of the sheath collapse increases with increasing φ and becomes less abrupt, the magnitude of 
the instantaneous electron flux that is required to balance charge decreases, and so the magnitude 
of the EFR reversal also decreases.  
The modulation of the sheath as a function of the phase of the harmonics translates into 
significant variation of IEADs i ncident onto the wafer, as shown in Fig 6a.  These IEADs are 
collected by summing over all ions striking the wafer for φ = 0° to 180°.  The IEADs generally 
decrease in maximum energy with increasing φ, following the trend in V dc.  The mean energy of 
the ions also decreases with increasing φ, as shown in Fig 6c.  Aside from the general decrease in 
energy, the shape of the IEADs reflect the temporal dynamics of the sheath.  The IEAD for φ = 0° 
contains a dominant peak at 3000 eV, a result of the sheath maintaining a nearly constant potential 
and thickness for the majority of the RF cycle. (See Fig. 5.)  The IEADs for φ = 45°, 90° and 135° 
contain more complex multi-modal structures with broader spreads in energy.  The structure in the 
IEADs reflects the length of time the sheath is maintained at a given potential and thickness.  The 
IEAD for φ = 180 ° has a single dominant peak at approximately 400 eV, as the sheath has one of 
two quasi-binary states – fully collapsed or fully expanded. 
 The EEADs incident onto the wafer surface are shown in Fig. 6b  for φ = 0° to 180°.  The 
electric field reversal for small values of φ produces a significant acceleration of electrons normal 
to the surface, generating an EEAD with a higher energy and nar rower angular distribution that 
might occur with low frequency, sinusoidal waveforms.  (Recall that for a purely thermal distribu-
tion of electrons onto the surface, the mean energy will be about the electron temperature, 3-4 eV, 
and the angular spread would span -90  to +90.)  The EEAD for φ = 0°, where the EFR has is 
largest magnitude, extends to 125 eV, considerably higher than the thermal bulk temperature of 
about 3.2 eV.  (Although the electron energy distribution is no n-Maxwellian in the bulk plasma, 
for convenience we will refer to the electron flux incident ont o the electrode in the absence of 
significant EFR as being the thermal electron flux or resulting from thermal electrons.)  The down-
ward trend of the magnitude of the electric field reversal with  increasing φ in turn leads to a de-
crease in the electron acceleration normal to the surface, and so to an overall reduction in electron 
13 
 
energy incident onto the surface.  With φ = 180°, the EEADs incident onto the surface closely 
resemble a thermal distribution, though with a somewhat narrower angular distribution.  The high 
energy, low angle electrons are likely the result of electrons accelerated in the sheath at the oppos-
ing elelctrode.  Due to the 2 decade log scale of the image, th ese structures are visually overem-
phasized. 
 In addition to the charged particle EADs onto the surface, the  silicon-dioxide etching mech-
anism depends on the magnitude of the individual fluxes of char ged and neutral species onto the 
wafer.  In particular, the ratio of polymer depositing and polymer removing species is important 
in dielectric etching in fluorocarbon containing plasmas.  The time averaged fluxes of neutral and 
ion species onto the wafer as a function φ are shown in Fig. 7.  With changes in φ there are sys-
tematic changes in EADs of charged particles onto the surface.  However, the neutral fluxes are 
fairly stable with moderate variation with changes in phase φ for most species.  With the high 
frequency power being held constant, the rates of electron impa ct dissociation and ionization are 
nearly constant, producing nearly constant fluxes.  The small variation in neutral fluxes with φ can 
be attributed to the contribution to dissociation by secondary electrons emitted from the wafer and 
accelerated by the sheath into the bulk plasma.  With the elect ron energy distribution of the sec-
ondary electrons being functions of sheath dynamics, rates of dissociation will also vary. 
 Similar trends apply for the fl uxes of ions to the wafer as a function of φ, which also show 
little variation with phase both in terms of overall magnitude as well as the relative ratios of ion 
fluxes.  The one notable exception is the flux of O + which increases for intermediate values of φ.  
The atomic weight of O+ is the lightest of ions having a significant flux to the surfa ce and so will 
respond more quickly to changes in the sheath (and presheath) compared to other ions.  There is 
also likely a component of ionization of atomic oxygen by high energy secondary electrons.  Given 
that the fluxes of Ar
+ and CF3+ are 2 orders of magnitude higher than that of O+, we do not expect 
this sensitivity of the flux of O+ on phase angle to have a large effect on etch properties.  
 The feature profiles for trenches in SiO 2 after 15 min of plasma etching are shown in Fig. 
8a for phase angles of φ = 0° to 180°.  Varying φ for constant power produces significant differ-
ences in etch depth, ranging from 1750 nm for φ = 0° to an immediate etch stop due to excessive 
polymer buildup at  φ = 180°.  Due to the similar absolute fluxes of reactants for all phase angles, 
this trend in etch depth is a consequence of the differences in charged particle energy distributions 
onto the wafer resulting from the change in applied voltage waveforms.  The higher energy of the 
14 
 
incident ions at low phase angles  produces higher rates of remo val of passivating polymer films 
and higher rates of sputtering of SiO2, directly or by chemically assisted processes.  The etch stop 
at φ = 180° is a consequence of the lower ion energies that are unable to balance the deposition of 
polymer by removal of polymer by sputtering.  A net etch at φ = 180° would be possible for lower 
rates of polymer deposition (lower incident fluxes of CFx radicals).  
 The higher incident energies of the positive ions also enable them to partially overcome 
positive electrical potential that builds up inside features.  This positive potential slows ions, 
thereby reducing their sputter yield with possible deflection of their trajectories inside the features, 
which leads to twisting.  One of the original motivations for VWT was to promote in-feature charge 
neutralization on surfaces by na rrowing the angular distributio n of electrons to better match that 
of the ions.  These narrow and energetic EEADs presumably would penetrate deeper into the fea-
ture than is possible by the broad, low energy thermal EEADs produced by conventional CCPs.  
The desired end result would be a charge neutral feature. 
 To test this hypothesis, one would need to perform reactor sca le simulations where the ion 
and neutral fluxes, and IEADs remain the same, while the EEADs varied from low energy, broad 
angle to high energy, narrow angle.  From our attempts to find such conditions, we conclude that 
the likelihood is small of being able to hold the IEAD constant while varying the EEAD.  The very 
conditions that modify the EEADs also modify the IEADs.  A larg e set of computational experi-
ments were performed to find combinations of voltage, power and waveforms that would maintain 
the same IEAD while toggling between a nearly thermal EEAD, and  an EFR enhanced EEAD.  
We were not able to find such conditions.   
 Instead, to test the hypothesis  that EEADs produced by electric field reversals can decrease 
the magnitude of positive charge in the feature the following process was used.  Etch profiles were 
compared when using EEADs produced from using VWT and a synthet ic thermal EEAD having 
a 3 eV electron temperature.  The fluxes of radicals and ions, and IEADs, were the same for both 
cases.  These reference simulations were performed for φ = 0°.  For these conditions, the differ-
ences in EEADs between those generated by VWT and synthetic the rmal distributions are the 
greatest.  The VWT case, φ = 0° also resulted in the overall most desirable feature profile.   
 The etch profiles and correspond ing final electric potential a re shown in Fig. 8b for the 
(left) self consistently generated VWT produced EEAD and (right ) for the synthetic thermal 
EEAD.  Both cases have both negative and positive charge distri buted throughout the feature, 
15 
 
though with net negative charge a t the top of the features and net positive charge deeper in the 
feature.  The end result is positive potential inside the featu re.  The maximum potential with the 
VWT produced EEAD is 227 V and the maximum potential produced w ith the thermal electrons 
is 346 V.  The larger positive potential with thermal electrons reduces the final etch depth by 30% 
by slowing the positive ions incident into the feature.  This r esult confirms the initial hypothesis 
that directional electrons produced by the EFR can be utilized to at least partially neutralize intra-
feature surface charging and lessen the decrease in etch rate resulting from that charging.  
 The maximum ion energy incident into the feature exceeds 3000 eV.  If there was no elec-
tron neutralization of positive charge in the feature, the positive potential would increase to nearly 
this maximum value to prevent positive charge from being continually collected.  Even when using 
the thermal electron EEAD, the potential inside the feature is significantly smaller than the maxi-
mum ion energy.  The thermal elect rons initially have isotropic  trajectories which dominantly 
strike the top of the feature.   However, the buildup of positiv e potential in the feature produces 
electric fields directed upwards that then accelerate these thermal electrons into the feature.  The 
thermal electrons accelerated into the feature then produce sig nificant neutralization of positive 
charge on the sidewalls.   
 In the steady state, the positive potential inside the feature  increases to a large enough 
magnitude so that the thermal ele ctrons accelerated into the fe ature are able to neutralize incre-
mental additions to positive charge.  This transient is directl y analogous to the charging of a die-
lectric surface in contact with a plasma to a negative potentia l that balances the flux of electrons 
and ions.  The use of the VWT produced EEAD, with its initially  higher energy and velocities 
towards the wafer, and narrower angular distribution, enables t his balance of electron and ion 
fluxes to be achieved with a lower positive potential.  The difference in electric maximum potential 
in the features between the thermal EEAD and the VWT produced EEAD, 120 V, corresponds to 
approximately the difference in the maximum energy of the VWT produced and thermal EEADs.  
Although this is not a general result, the difference in potential would not be expected to exceed 
this value.   
 When using the VWT generated and thermal EEADs, the location o f maximum potential 
is not at the bottom of the feature but at depths of 1.2 m for the VWT EEAD and 0.77 m for the 
thermal EEAD.  The charging of the mask is nominal compared to the energies of ions and EFR 
accelerated electrons.  The mask charging may be more important  for low aspect ratio (AR) 
16 
 
features where the voltages and powers are lower.  However, for  HAR features, this is typically 
not an issue.  The maximum of the positive potential is a function of AR.  As the feature is etched 
deeper and the AR increases, the maximum in positive potential transitions from the bottom of the 
feature at low AR to the side of the feature as the AR increases [40].  For small AR, ions even with 
a finite angular spread can directly strike the bottom of the f eature, and so the maximum positive 
potential is on the bottom of the  feature.  For HAR features, i ons having a finite angular spread 
will strike the sidewalls, and positive charging will occur dominantly on the sidewalls.  The neu-
tralized particles then proceed as hot neutrals deeper into the feature.  The shadowing by the fairly 
thick photoresist produces a view angle of 3.8 (VWT) to 4.3 (thermal) which is in line with the 
ion angular spreads.   
 The charging of the feature occu rs over many RF cycles.  There are no specific in-feature, 
intra-cycle dynamics of the electric field as the charging and electric fields are the results of aver-
aging charged particle fluxes over these many RF cycles.  For bias frequencies of many MHz and 
above, distinct cyclic in-feature electric field dynamics will likely only occur when using pulsed 
power. 
 Electron trajectories inside the  feature depend on their initi al distribution in energy and 
angle as well as the acceleration resulting from electric field s in the feature produced by charge 
deposition.  In the case with the highest electron energy incident onto the wafer (φ = 0°) the mean 
energy of the EEAD is 62 eV.  Given the maximum electric potent ial in the feature is 280 V, the 
electron trajectories are still likely dominated by the electri c fields produced by charging.  To 
verify this likelihood, electron energies incident onto the sur face inside the feature were spatially 
sampled.  To enable a side-by-side comparison of these energies , the following process was fol-
lowed.  The feature shape and potential configuration resulting  f r o m  t h e  φ =  0 °  c a s e  a f t e r  1 5  
minutes of etching was used and kept constant.  (That is, no fu rther evolution of the feature or 
potential was allowed.)  Initial electron trajectories were sam pled from the EEAD produced by 
VWT or from a thermal distribution having an electron temperature of 3 eV.  The electron trajec-
tories were followed into the feature, and the electron energies striking the surface were recorded 
and averaged at each spatial location.  Tests were performed for VWT produced EEAD and ther-
mal distributions when including acceleration from the charge produced electrics fields, and when 
excluding that acceleration. 
 The resulting spatially resolved average electron energies inc ident on the feature surface 
17 
 
are shown in Fig. 9.  The average energies shown in Fig. 9a are  for initial EEADs (VWT and 
thermal) when including acceleration in the electric fields produced by charging.  The average 
energies striking the surface for VWT and thermal distributions are spatially similar, and qualita-
tively resemble the electric po tential shown in Fig. 8b.  These  distributions largely result from 
acceleration of the incident electrons by the in-feature electr ic fields.  The average energy of the 
electrons striking the surface for the initially thermal electrons is maximum at about 240 eV, which 
corresponds to the maximum positive potential inside the featur e.  The average energy for the 
electrons launched from the VWT produced EEAD is maximum at about 275 eV.  This value is 
larger than for the thermal electrons by 35-40 eV due to the el ectrons selected from the VWT 
produced EEAD beginning their trajectories with significant initial velocities.   
 To reinforce this finding, avera ge electron energies striking the surface of the feature were 
computed for the VWT produced EEAD and for thermal electrons wh en excluding acceleration 
by electric fields, as shown in Fig. 9b.  The average energies for the VWT produced EEAD range 
up to 35 eV and those for the thermal EEAD range up to 6 eV, bo th values largely reflecting the 
initial distributions.   
 These findings suggest that for reasonably large positive pote ntials produced inside fea-
tures, the high energy VWT produced EEADs will not dominate the  resulting feature properties 
compared to EEADs produced using conventional waveforms.  In bo th cases, in the steady state 
electrons are accelerated into the feature in such a manner as to neutralize the incremental charge 
produced by fluxes of positive ions.  This is particularly true for positive potentials that are much 
larger than the average energy of the incident EEADs.   
 
V. Plasma and Etch Properties for 2000 W of VWT Power  
 While maintaining 500 W of power on the top electrode, the power delivered by the bottom 
electrode was increased to P
VWT = 2000 W to be more aligned with industrial processes.  The 
resulting voltage amplitudes for the top and bottom electrodes, and the DC self-bias are shown in 
Fig. 4b as a function of phase angle.  The top electrode voltag e amplitude remains nearly un-
changed compared to the PVWT = 1000 W cases with there being little variation with phase angle 
φ.  In order to accommodate the increase in power, the bottom el ectrode voltage amplitude in-
creased by a factor of 1.5-2 compared to the P VWT = 1000 W cases.  The low- and high-power 
cases have nearly identical trends with phase angle, which suggests that these trends are the result 
18 
 
of the sheath dynamics rather th an being of stochastic origin.  Similar to the 1000 W cases, V dc 
decreases with increasing phase angle as a consequence of the EAE.  The large magnitude of V dc 
correlates to the larger applied voltage amplitude. 
 The radially averaged, axial electric fields as a function of time during the RF cycle for 
PVWT = 2000 W are shown in Fig. 10 for different phase angles φ.  Overall, the sheath dynamics 
and electric field reversals as a function of phase angle are s imilar to the P VWT = 1000 W cases 
(Fig. 5) with the EFR decreasing with phase.  One exception is the φ = 0° case whose EFR is 
reduced compared to φ = 45° at same power and also reduced compared to the φ = 0° case at 1000 
W.  This apparent outlie r is the result of the geometrical cons traints of the plasma reactor and of 
the finite electrode gap (distance between bottom and top elect rodes).  For example, the spatially 
resolved electron densities averaged over the RF period are sho wn in Fig. 11 for φ = 0°, 90° and 
180°.  While the peak electron densities vary by only about 10%  the spatial distributions vary 
considerably with change in φ. 
 With low values of φ, the time averaged sheath thickness is larger, which reflects the larger 
(more negative) DC bias and voltage amplitude.  The sheath thickness then occupies a significant 
fraction of the gap.  The compressed bulk plasma is then more sensitive to, for example, disconti-
nuities between the top electrode and the bounding dielectric i nsulator where electric field en-
hancements occurs.  The end result is a less spatially uniform plasma.  We acknowledge that, if 
unaddressed, this expansion of t he sheath could potentially aff ect the spatial uniformity of the 
wafer processing, and that this effect may be amplified by this  particular reactor configuration.  
Several reactor configurations were investigated (e.g., adjusting the shape and diameter of the fo-
cus rings, and top electrode) to confirm that the VWT scaling discussed here, and sheath expansion 
and plasma compression are general trends.  There are many actions, such as adjusting the process 
parameters (gas composition, gas pressure, flow rates, power) a nd/or reactor geometry that could 
be used to recoup the trends with phase angle that were obtained at the lower power.  This optimi-
zation, is beyond the scope of this work.  That said, this demo nstration emphasizes the concept 
that design of plasma processing reactors must be performed from a systems perspective.  Opti-
mizing one aspect of the design, such as EFR, may ultimately be  limited by other aspects of the 
design, such as gap dimension. 
 The similarities to the trends of the lower power cases are al so reflected in the IEADs to 
the wafer as a function of phase angle, are shown in Fig. 12a.  While compared to the lower power 
19 
 
cases, the ion energies are higher overall due to the larger vo ltage amplitudes, the peak energies 
still decline with increase in the phase angle from a maximum of about 4500 eV for φ = 0° to 3000 
eV at φ =180°.  Comparing the cases with highest and lowest ion energi es (φ = 0° and φ = 180°), 
the peak ion energy was reduced by approximately 85% at 1000 W and reduced by 38% for 2000 
W.  This degree of ion energy control should enable some degree of customizing fluxes for energy-
sensitive surface processes.  In particular, the distribution of high-energy ions compared to low 
energy ions within the IEAD is sensitive to phase angle.   
These trends for the IEADs are in contrast to the much lighter and more agile electrons, 
whose EEADs to the wafer are shown in Fig. 12b.  The EEADs display the same general trends as 
in the low power case.  The EEADs have high energies and narrow angular spreads for low values 
of φ compared to thermal distributions due to the electric field reversal produced by VWT.  The 
energies decrease and angular spread increases with increasing phase angle φ.  The φ = 0° case is, 
again, a notable exception, having a lower peak energy than a larger phase angle.  This exception 
correlates with the smaller EFR described above.  The suppresse d electric field reversal due to 
geometric confinement of the sheath leads to reduced electron acceleration, resulting is the com-
paratively lower electron energy.   
 The IEADs, EEADs and fluxes for different phase angles for 200 0 W bias power were used 
as input to otherwise identical MCFPM simulations.  The final etch profiles are shown in Fig. 13a. 
Significant etch depths were reached for all phases, in deference to the P
VWT = 1000 W cases where 
an etch stop occurred due to excessive fluxes of polymer formin g radicals, or lack of polymer 
sputtering ions, at large phase angle.  There are, however, significant differences in etch depth and 
overall feature quality.  The φ = 0° case produces the deepest overall etch while having perhaps a 
tolerable amount of bowing.  The φ = 45° case has less bowing but lower etch rate.  These trends 
result from φ = 0° case having the higher ion energies (faster overall etch rate) while the φ = 45° 
has a narrower ion angular distribution (less bowing), albeit at a lower energy.  Some component 
of the narrower feature could be a result of the EEAD at φ = 45° being more energetic which 
enables some non-negligible decrease in in-feature charging.  The shape of the EEAD is important 
to moderately increasing etch rate and moderately modifying sid ewall slope through neutralizing 
charge.  However, the final feat ure quality is dominated by the EAD of ions rather than the elec-
trons.   
 Analogous to the low power case, MCFPM simulations using synth etic thermal EEADs 
20 
 
were performed, and the resulting profiles are compared to etch profiles resulting from VWT pro-
duced EEADs in Fig. 13b for φ = 0°, 90° and 180°.  In the φ = 0° and 180° cases the differences 
between the profiles obtained with thermal and VWT EEADs are sm all and below the statistical 
threshold discussed in Appendix A.  The profile obtained with t he VWT EEAD for φ  = 90° is 
deeper with a similar amount of tapering compared to the thermal EEAD.  These trends result from 
the EEADs onto the wafer for these conditions having the highest energy and lowest angular spread 
for intermediate values of φ.  This correlation between the improvement of the final etched feature 
and the energy and directionality of the electrons reinforces t he conclusion that these directional 
electrons enhance the natural neutralization of charge that is produced by acceleration of thermal 
electrons into the feature.  However, the properties of the EEADs do not dominate the shape of the 
feature.  
 
VI. Concluding Remarks 
To investigate the consequences of voltage waveform tailoring (VWT) on etching of SiO
2 
using a capacitively coupled Ar/CF4/O2 plasma, computational investigations of the reactor scale 
and feature scale processes were performed.  While applying 500 W at 80 MHz to the top electrode 
with the goal of sustaining a constant plasma density, the bottom electrode was driven using VWT 
composed of consecutive harmonics with a fundamental frequency of 1 MHz at powers of 1000 
W and 2000 W.  The phase of the even harmonics φ was varied in order to generate electrical 
asymmetry as well as electric field reversal in the bottom shea th.  It was found that changing φ 
enables control of charged particle dynamics incident onto the wafer surface which in turn trans-
lates to significant changes in etch profiles.  At low phase an gle the EAE as well as the EFR are 
most significant, which leads to increased energy and direction ality of ions as well as electrons 
onto the wafer.   
These favorable distributions in energy and angle increase etch  rate by partially reducing 
the negative effects of intra-feature charging.  The directional electrons are better able to reach the 
lower echelons of the feature and partially neutralize positive  charges.  The higher energy ions 
have larger rates of chemical s puttering while also being more able overcome the remaining de-
flecting electric fields produced  by in-feature charging.  Overall, for otherwise equal processing 
conditions and time, low φ cases produced higher etch rates and more favorable sidewall s lope.  
For low bias power, the reduction in ion energy with large valu es of phase angle resulted in an 
21 
 
etch stop due to the large incident flux of polymerizing radicals.  At low bias power, having higher 
ion energies, sputtering of the polymer enabled competitive etching even at high phase angle. 
A key finding of this investigation is the VWT produced EEADs h aving large energy and 
narrow angle do not produce the expected significant reductions of in-feature charging compared 
to thermal EEADs.  The VWT produced EEADs did produce somewhat higher etch rates and lower 
in-feature potentials.  However, the buildup of positive charge  in the feature accelerates thermal 
electrons into the feature to energies commensurate with that of the positive potential.  The VWT 
produced EEADs are also accelerated into the feature by this po sitive potential.  If the positive 
potential is significantly larger than the average energy of the VWT produced EEAD, there is little 
difference in feature properties between having thermal or VWT generated EEADs.  Both are 
accelerated into the feature by the positive charge to sufficie nt energy to neutralize, in the steady 
state, the incremental positive charge brought into the feature by ions. 
Another key finding is the need for a systems perspective in process design and in employ-
ing VWT in particular.  The results of this study showed that a t low power, the VWT generated 
EEADs produced a beneficial effect, enabling higher etch rates for a given power compared to 
conventional sinusoidal excitation.  Conversely, the same etch rate could be sustained at a lower 
power.  We also found that this benefit was not universal.  At higher powers, we found that the 
gap dimension (distance between wafer and top electrode) ultima tely limited the ability of VWT 
to generate electric field reversal and energetic fluxes to the  wafer.  Low phase angle produces a 
larger (more negative) DC bias, which thickens the sheath.  For a narrow gap CCP, the sheath may 
consume a large fraction of the gap, which then interferes with the formation of EFR.  The funda-
mental physics of VWT generated EEADs applies to a wide range of powers.  However, as with 
many excitation schemes in plasma etching, the benefits of VWT are likely process dependent, 
being sensitive to geometry, frequency, pressure and gas mixture.  
In the ideal, one would like to tailor an IEAD to best produce the desired etch feature, and 
then tune the feature profile by tailoring the EEAD.  Unfortunately, independently producing spec-
ified IEAD and EEAD with the same waveform is difficult.  Changing the waveform to generate, 
for example, the desired EEAD will also affect the IEAD.  There may be opportunity to separately 
tailor the IEAD and EEAD by using binary-pulsed system.  The sy stem would consisted of two 
separate waveforms alternately  applied, with one waveform optim ized to produce the desired 
IEAD and the second to produce the desired EEAD. 
22 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 This work was supported by Samsung Electronics Ltd.  These res ults were also based upon 
work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Fusion Energy 
Sciences under award number DE-SC0020232, and supported by the National Science Foundation 
(PHY-2009219). 
Conflict of Interest 
 The authors have no conflicts  of interest to disclose. 
Data Availability 
 The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request. 
Appendix A:  Statistical Variation in Predicted Feature Profiles 
 The Monte-Carlo method employed in the MCFPM produces profiles  that are inherently 
subject to statistical variations.  This is especially the case  when charging processes are included 
which can act as a feedback loop which amplifies statistical va riations.  These variations result 
from the sequence of random numbers that are used to initially generate particle trajectories to-
wards the surface.  Quantitiatively different features are produced by changing the seed that is used 
to initialize the random number ge nerators.  Even when keeping the same seeds, when executing 
the simulation in a parallel computing environment, there are n early unavoidable differences in 
sequencing of the particle trajectories tracked on different pr ocessors.  Different random number 
generators are used for each par allel thread to minimize these sequencing issues, but they will 
occur.   
 To ensure the overall validity o f results produced when statistical variations occur, it is 
imperative to verify that the r andom run-to-run variations are of significantly smaller magnitude 
than the effects discussed.  Thi s includes the overall trends i n feature properties as a function of 
phase angle φ as well as the isolated effects produced by surface charge neutralization by the inci-
dent electron flux, perhaps most sensitive to these statistical variations. 
 To assess the statistical variations, a series of identical si mulations was performed while 
varying the random number seed.  These cases also include the i nherent statistical variations that 
occur in the parallel comuting environment.  The resulting profiles for the φ = 0°, P
VWT = 1000 W 
23 
 
series are shown in Fig. 14a for 15 minutes of etching.  The ma ximum difference from the mean 
etch depth for this series is less than 5% of the total etch.  This variation is less than the change in 
etch depth and profile shape produced by the change in IEADs as a function of φ observed in this 
work.  Similar conclusions extend to variation between the profiles produced with VWT produced 
and thermal EEADs.  
 Statistical variations  of this type are not limited to numerical simulations but also occur in 
actual etch processes, producing a certain degree of feature-to -feature non-uniformity.  This sta-
tistical feature-to-feature variation results from the small si ze of features, which in turn produces 
statistically different fluxes of reactant species into the fea ture.  A common approach to remedy 
these unwanted statistical variations in HVM processes is over-etching.  In over-etching, a terminal 
or etch stop layer is located at the desired final etch depth.  For any given process, the etch rate 
into this layer is significantly lower than for the overlying substrate.  This means that once the stop 
layer is reached during the process, vertical etching effective ly stops (or is significnatly slowed) 
while etching of the tapered side walls continues.  Extending the etch process beyond this contact 
time, over-etching, partially remedies some of the statistical variations in f eature profile by 
straightening the sidewalls of the feature.   
 A series of profiles are shown in Fig. 14b produced with different random number seeds, 
analogous to Fig 14a, while etching to the stop layer and over- etching for a total of 30 minutes.  
Through this over-etching, the variations in etch depth and profile are reduced.  Where applicable, 
etch stop layers and over-etching can suppress the statistical run to run differences in feature prop-
erties.   
   
24 
 
[1] V. M. Donnelly and A. Kornblit, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 31, 050825 (2013). 
[2] J. H. Kim, et al., Thin Solid Films 637, 43 (2017). 
[3] K. J. Kanarik, S. Tan and R. A. Gottscho, J. Phys. Chem. Le tt. 9, 4814 (2018). 
[4] G. S. Oehrlein and S. Hamaguchi, Plasma Sources Sci. Techno l. 27, 023001 (2018). 
[5] H. Tanaka, M. Kido, K. Yahashi, M. Oomura, et al., Dig. Tec h. Pap. - Symp. VLSI Technol. 
14–5 (2007). 
[6] S. N. Hsiao, et al.,  Appl. Surf. Sci. 541, 148439 (2021). 
[7] K. Ishikawa, et al.,  Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 57, 06JA01 (2018). 
[8] B. Wu, A. Kumar and S. Pamarthy J. Appl. Phys. 108, 51101 (2010). 
[9] T. Iwase, et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SE0802 (2019). 
[10] M. Omura, et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SEEB02 (2019). 
[11] E. G. Shustin, J. Com mun. Technol. Electron. 62, 454 (2017). 
[12] H. W. Tak et al., Appl. Surf. Sci. 600, 154050 (2022). 
[13] B. R. Rogers and T. S. Cale, Vacuum 65, 267 (2002). 
[14] I. Adamovich, et al J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 50, 323001 (2017). 
[15] R. Sahu, A. Tropina and R. Miles, Phys. Plasmas 29, 040701 (2022). 
[16] M. Klich, et al., Plasm a Sources Sci. Technol. 31, 045014 (2022). 
[17] P. Hartmann, et al., J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys.  54, 255202 (2021). 
[18] J. Schulze, et al., J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 41, 105214 (2008). 
[19] B. Radjenović and M. Radmilović-Radjenović, Engineering 6, 1 (2014). 
[20] B. M. Radjenović, M. D. Radmilović-Radjenović and Z. L. Pe trović IEEE Trans. Plasma 
Sci. 36, 874 (2008). 
[21] G. S. Hwang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B. 15, 70 (1997). 
[22] P. Zhang, L. Zhang and K. Lv, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process. 40, 1605 (2020). 
[23] P. Zhang, L. Zhang and L. Xu, Plasma Process. Polym. 17, e2000014 (2020). 
[24] H. Jansen, et al., Microelectron. Eng. 35, 45 (1997). 
[25] C. Han, et al., Semicond. Sci. Technol. 35, 045003 (2020). 
[26] F. Krüger, S. Wilczek, T. Mussenbrock and J. Schulze, Plas ma Sources Sci. Technol. 28, 
75017 (2019). 
[27] S. Brandt, et al., Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 28, 095021 (2019). 
[28] U. Czarnetzki, D. Luggenhölscher and H. F. Döbele, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 8, 230 
(1999). 
[29] Y. X. Liu, et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 101 , 114101 (2012). 
[30] S. Sharma and M. M. Turner, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 47 285201 (2014). 
[31] 
M. Wang and M. J. Kushner, J. Appl. Phys. 107, 023309 (2010). 
[32] J. Wang, S. Dine, J.-P. Booth and E. V. Johnson J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 37, 021303 (2019). 
[33] B. G. Heil, U. Czarnetzki, R. P. Brinkmann and T. Mussenbrock, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 
25 
 
41, 165202 (2008). 
[34] J. Schulze, E. Schüngel and U. Czarnetzki, J. Phys. D. App l. Phys. 42, 092005 (2009). 
[35] M. J. Kushner, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 42, 194013 (2009). 
[36] S. H. Song and M. J. Kushner, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol.  21, 055028 (2012). 
[37] A. V. Vasenkov, X. Li, G. S.  Oehrlein and M. J. Kushner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A. 22, 511 
(2004). 
[38] A. V. Vasenkov and M. J. Kushner, J. Appl. Phys. 95, 834 (2004). 
[39] P. Tian and M. J. Kushner, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 24, 034017 (2015). 
[40] S. Huang, et al, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 37, 031304 (2019). 
[41] Y. Zhang, et al., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces , Film. 35, 021303 (2016). 
[42] C. M. Huard, S. Sriraman, A. Paterson and M. J. Kushner J.  Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, 
Surfaces, Film. 36, 06B101 (2018). 
[43] J. K. Kim, et al., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 31, 061302 (2013). 
[44] J. K. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. Il Cho and G. Y. Yeom, J. Vac. Sc i. Technol. A 33, 021303 (2014). 
[45] U. Czarnetzki, J. Schulze, E. Schüngel and Z. Donkó, Plasm a Sources Sci. Technol. 20, 
024010 (2011). 
 
  
26 
 
Figures Captions 
1. Schematics of the reactor.  a) The two frequency CCP has the VWT power applied to the lower 
electrode and a sinusoidal, 80 MHz waveform applied to the top.   b) Electrical schematic of 
the system.  From F. Kruger et al, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol.  30, 085002 (2021).  Repro-
duced by permission of IOP Publishing Ltd. 
2. Voltage waveforms resulting from different phase angles, φ = 0° (top) to φ = 180° (bottom).  
The time scale is in units of the period of the fundamental frequency. 
3. Initial geometry used in for feature profile simulations.  A 700 nm mask defines a 100 nm 
opening to 3000 nm thick SiO2.  The simulations are for trench etching, performed in 3-dimen-
sions having a finite depth. 
4. Voltage amplitudes for the VWT bias (Vbias) and top power (Vtop), and DC self-bias as a func-
tion of phase angle.  a) PVWT = 1000 W and b) PVWT = 2000 W. 
5. Vertical electric field component as a function of time and dis tance from wafer for P VWT = 
1000 W for phase angles of a) 0°, b) 45°, c) 90°, d) 135° and e) 180°.  The shape of the voltage 
waveform applied to the bottom electrode is shown in each image.  
6. Properties of ions and electrons incident onto the wafer for P VWT = 1000 W.  a) IEAD and b) 
EEAD for phase angles of φ = 0°, 45°, 90°, 135° and 180°.  The distributions are separate ly 
normalized and plotted on a log-scale over 2 decades.  c) Mean ion energy as a function of 
phase angle φ. 
7. Fluxes of reactive species onto the wafer as a function of phas e angle φ.  a) Neutrals and b) 
ions. 
8. Feature properties for PVWT = 1000 W following 15 minutes of etching  a) Feature profiles for 
different phase angles ( φ = 0°, 45°, 90°, 135° and 180°).  b) Comparison of etch result and 
electric potential for (left) self-consistent VWT produced EEAD and (right) synthetic thermal 
EEAD.  The potentials are separately normalized with the maximu m values indicated at the 
top of the images. 
9. Spatial distribution of average electron energies incident on t he surface of the feature.  The 
feature properties are for PVWT = 1000 W and φ = 0° after 15 minutes of etching.  Results are 
shown for initial EEADs produced with VWT and for thermal electrons having a temperature 
27 
 
of 3 eV.   a) When including acceleration in electric fields pr oduced by feature charging.  b) 
Without acceleration due to feature charging.  The view is looking obliquely into the 3-dimen-
sional feature having reflective boundary conditions front-and-back. 
10. Vertical electric field component as a function of time and dis tance from wafer for P VWT = 
2000 W for phase angles of a) 0°, b) 45°, c) 90°, d) 135° and e) 180°.  The shape of the voltage 
waveform applied to the bottom electrode is shown in each image. 
11. Electron density for P VWT = 2000 W for phase angle φ  of a) 0°, b) 90° and c)  180°).  The 
densities are plotted on a log-scale over 2-decades. 
12. Energy and angular distributions for charged particles incident onto the wafer for PVWT = 2000 
W for phase angles of φ = 0°, 45°, 90°, 135° and 180°.  a) Ions and b) electrons. The distribu-
tions are separately normalized and plotted on a log-scale over 2 decades. 
13. Feature properties for PVWT = 2000 W following 15 minutes of etching  a) Feature profiles for 
different phase angles (φ = 0°, 45°, 90°, 135° and 180°).  b) Comparison of profiles obt ained 
with VWT generated EEADs and synthetic thermal electron distrib utions for phase angles φ 
of  0°, 90° and 180°. 
14. Statistical run-to-run variation of the final etch profiles for the PVWT = 1000 W and φ = 0° case.  
a) 15 min run and b) 30 min to produce over etch into the stop layer.  For each series of profiles, 
each case had a different seed for the random number generators, in addition to having the 
inherent statistical variations in the parallel computing environment.  
 
Kruger et al,
Fig. 1 of 14
Kruger et al,
Fig. 2 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 3 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 4 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 5 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 6 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 7 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 8 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 9 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 10 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 11 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 12 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 13 of 14

Kruger et al,
Fig. 14 of 14
