Japanese Journal of
Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW • OPEN ACCESS

You may also like

Progress report on high aspect ratio patterning for
memory devices

- First demonstration of phase-controlled
etching for high aspect ratio silicon
structures using triode-type capacitively
coupled plasmas
Haewook Park, Hyunjoo Lee, Sungyoung
Yoon et al.

To cite this article: Meihua Shen et al 2023 Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62 SI0801

- Embedding human annoyance rate
models in wireless smart sensors for
assessing the influence of subway traininduced ambient vibration
Ke Sun, Wei Zhang, Huaping Ding et al.

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

- Enabling 3D NAND bit cost scaling with
merged etches
John Hoang, George Matamis, Calvin
Pham et al.

This content was downloaded from IP address 174.166.11.46 on 02/08/2026 at 22:11

PROGRESS REVIEW

Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 62, SI0801 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.35848/1347-4065/accbc7

Progress report on high aspect ratio patterning for memory devices
Meihua Shen, Thorsten Lill, John Hoang*, Hao Chi, Aaron Routzahn, Jonathan Church, Pramod Subramonium,
Ragesh Puthenkovilakam, Sirish Reddy, Sonal Bhadauriya, Sloan Roberts, and Gowri Kamarthy
Lam Research Corporation 4650 Cushing Pkwy, Fremont, CA 93538, United States of America
*

E-mail: john.hoang@lamresearch.com

Received December 12, 2022; revised March 11, 2023; accepted April 10, 2023; published online May 19, 2023
High aspect ratio (HAR) silicon nitride and silicon oxide (ONON) channel hole patterning in 3D NAND flash presents great challenges. This report
summarizes some of the recent progress in patterning from the perspective of HAR etching and deposition-etch co-optimization (DECO). HAR
etching mechanisms will be discussed, with a focus on how to reduce the aspect ratio-dependent etching (ARDE) effect. Highlights of the new lowtemperature etch process will be presented, with significant improvement in the ARDE being observed. New simulation results from a Monte Carlo
feature-scale model provide insights into ion scattering and mask interactions on the control of the channel hole profile. DECO is a new frontier to
enable better control of the channel hole shape at HAR. Film tier optimization and carbon liner insertion results show improvement in channel hole
profile control. © 2023 The Author(s). Published on behalf of The Japan Society of Applied Physics by IOP Publishing Ltd

1. Introduction

Over the past decade, demands for ﬂash memory devices
have increased tremendously due to the ever-growing digital
economy in consumer electronics, data centers, the Internet
of Things, healthcare, and the automotive industry. Growth
has further accelerated during recent years with remote
working environments. Three-dimensional (3D) NAND ﬂash
memory has become the dominant non-volatile memory
device since its ﬁrst introduction in 2007.1) 3D NAND
technology is based on forming memory cells on the sidewall, and cells are stacked vertically. With this 3D stacked
architecture, the device scaling roadmap is supported by
adding more memory cell layers vertically to reach a high bit
density at reduced cost per gigabyte. Since the ﬁrst volume
production device with 24 layers in 2013,2) the industry
has advanced one technological node approximately every
1.5 years, and major IC vendors provided products with more
than 150 layers in 2022.3) Forecasts show that 500 to 1000
layers are on the horizon with double- or triple-deck
architectures.
One of the critical steps in 3D stacking is forming word
line channel holes in multiple layers of silicon nitride and
silicon oxide (ONON) ﬁlms. Typical channel hole formation
process ﬂows are outlined in Fig. 1. Hundreds of layers of
alternating oxide and nitride ﬁlms were deposited in a
dielectric deposition chamber, followed by multi-layer
mask ﬁlm deposition. After lithographic patterning, the
hard mask is opened, and the ONON channel hole is formed
in a high aspect ratio (HAR) dielectric etching system.
The deposition of hundreds of layers of ONON ﬁlm faces
multiple challenges.4) Control of angstrom-level thickness
uniformity within the layers from top to bottom and across
the wafer is required. Mechanical and thermal stabilities must
be maintained to ensure stack stability. Low ﬁlm shrinkage
and stress control are essential to ensure successful overall
process integration ﬂow. High-volume production systems
also demand stringent control of defects and productivity.
On the patterning side, hundreds of layers of ONON ﬁlms
are patterned to about 100 nm hole size, and this pushes the
etch aspect ratio (depth/width) above 100:1. At such a HAR,
the formation of billions of perfect circular holes from top to
bottom and across the whole wafer faces great challenges.
SI0801-1

Among the many steps in the ﬂow, HAR channel hole etch
remains the most critical step and requires the most advanced
hardware and process technology innovations. The ability to
deliver ion bombardment with high peak power at narrow ion
angular and energy distributions to the bottom of the hole is
the holy grail of HAR etching. In this paper, we will review
and brieﬂy discuss the important elements of HAR plasma
etch systems. On the etch process side, etch chemistry and
polymer management play an important role in controlling
the channel hole shape from top to bottom. There are
extensive research studies in the literature on typical carbon
ﬂuorine chemistry systems5–9) for dielectric etching.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in low-temperature
processing for channel hole etching due to enhanced etch
rates and proﬁle improvements.10,11) In this article, we will
brieﬂy review some of the fundamental aspects of lowtemperature process regimes in the context of HAR etching
and discuss the beneﬁts of the new process, whereby
signiﬁcant improvement in HAR etching have recently
been achieved.
Computational simulations can provide valuable insight to
aid hardware and process development. Feature-scale modeling coupled with reactor-scale modeling has been an active
research area over the past decades and has helped to
elucidate the effect of aspect ratio dependence based on
ion/neutral transport and the potential origins of feature hole
distortions such as striation and twisting.12–15) We will
present and discuss the new ﬁndings on the latest featurescale modeling based on a semi-empirical Monte Carlo
method developed at Lam Research.
Deposition and etch co-optimization (DECO) is a new area
that has only been reported recently.16,17) In the 3D NAND
ﬂow, the nitride in the ONON stack is a sacriﬁcial layer and
is replaced with tungsten to form the word line.3,4) In HAR
etch, maintaining a vertical proﬁle from top to bottom is most
difﬁcult. HAR etching proﬁles in general are tapered at
deeper etch depths, while the top of the hole becomes
enlarged. With SiN being a replacement ﬁlm, we can explore
SiN tier optimization for proﬁle control to reduce the top bow
while enlarging the bottom hole critical dimension (CD) for
the HAR etch. The optimization requires close collaboration
between teams for both the HAR etch and ONON stack
deposition modules to realize the full beneﬁts.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published on behalf of The Japan Society of Applied Physics by IOP Publishing Ltd
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 license. Any further distribution of this
work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI.

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)

Fig. 1. Typical ONON channel hole ﬂow.

A sacriﬁcial liner approach is another novel DECO scheme
to prevent CD enlargement of bow holes at deeper etch
depths. With ever-increasing numbers of ONON layers,
opening the bottom CD at deeper etch depths becomes
more difﬁcult without blowing up the top bow CD. We
introduce a sacriﬁcial carbon liner that is inserted after
reaching a certain depth, and then continue the remaining
etch until full depth is reached. This concept provides a new
process window for overall control of channel hole shape to
support future roadmaps. These results and some of the
interactions between etch and liner will also be discussed.
2. HAR etch mechanisms

Several HAR etches are required to pattern, isolate, and
connect vertically integrated 3D memory devices. The most
critical etch process in the manufacturing of 3D ﬂash devices
is the formation of cylindrical holes inside the ﬁlms which
house the storage devices. This process etches alternating
ONON layers. These materials were etched originally with
hydroﬂuorocarbon gases such as CF4 and CHF3. Increasing
selectivity requirements led to the use of hydrogen and
carbon-rich gases such as CH2F2, CH3F, C4F8 and
C4F6,5–9) and the mask was changed from photoresist to
CVD deposited carbon. Oxygen and noble gases were added
to control the deposition rate of ﬂuorocarbon polymers on the
mask and inside the etched feature. Etching proceeds when
ions can traverse this polymer layer and mix with the etching
material. In the case of silicon oxide, the reaction products
are COx and SiFx.
This etching mechanism encounters challenges for HARs
because the ﬂux of neutral precursors for polymer formation
attenuates rapidly as the aspect ratio increases.13,14) The
aspect ratio for a hole or trench in general is deﬁned as the
ratio of the depth to the width of the hole or trench. The
transport of neutrals inside the etch feature can be described
by Knudsen transport. For a cylinder with an aspect ratio of
50:1, only 2.5% of the incoming ﬂux reaches the other end of
the cylinder due to diffuse collisions with the sidewall.18) The
reason for this loss of neutrals is that they don’t have a
preferred direction of movement. Ions are accelerated in the
normal direction to the wafer surface when they pass the
plasma sheath. Therefore, the etching mechanism for aspect
ratios beyond 40 or 50 is dominated by fast, chemically
active species which carry the mechanical energy and possess
the chemical composition to initiate etching. These species
can be ions or neutrals, which originate from ions that were

neutralized in collisions with the feature sidewall. The
mechanisms can be described as more akin to chemical
sputtering rather than synergistic neutral–ion etching.
Attenuation of ion and neutral ﬂuxes as a function of
aspect ratio reduces the etching rate. This undesired effect is
called aspect ratio-dependent etching (ARDE). To reduce
ARDE, the transport of neutrals and ions must be enhanced.
For ions, this can be achieved by increasing the ion energy.5)
To etch HAR features, the plasma chemistry must be
adjusted. High deposition rates of passivating species may
cause clogging at the top of the structures at low temperatures. Therefore, low-temperature processes must have a
“leaner” plasma chemistry with higher ﬂuorine and hydrogen
concentrations. This results in the absence of a measurable
polymer ﬁlm on the surface of SiO2 for low-temperature
HAR etching processes versus conventional processes. This
effect is illustrated in Fig. 2.
One of the beneﬁts of a low-temperature process is a
higher etch rate. The blanket silicon oxide and nitride etching
rates increase by about 20% for a lean HAR etch process
when lowering the temperature from 60 °C to −20 °C. This
can be attributed to increased adsorption of reactive species.
Figure 3 shows the etching rate for a conventional temperature and a lean, low-temperature process as a function of
depth.
The etching rate diminishes much more quickly for the
high-temperature process than for the low-temperature process. One possible explanation is that chemical reactions are
suppressed at lower temperatures. Coburn and Winters
predicted a lower ARDE when the reactive sticking coefﬁcient is reduced.19) An additional explanation for the improved ARDE performance at lower temperatures is potentially surface diffusion of neutrals.20) Knudsen transport and
surface diffusion can be viewed as separate, independent
ﬂuxes or as synergistic, interdependent modes of neutral
transport.20,21)
Another beneﬁt of the leaner chemistry used in lowtemperature etching is an improved mask morphology, which
translates into improved circularity and sidewall roughness of
the etched holes, as shown in Fig. 4. Polymer deposition on
the sidewalls of the mask, so-called necking, is considered
the main root cause of sidewall roughness.22,23) For the

Fig. 2. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) surface composition of a
blanket SiO2 ﬁlm before etching and after etching with a low-temperature
process and a conventional HAR etching process.

SI0801-2

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)

Fig. 3. Normalized etching rate versus depth for conventional (solid
circles) and low-temperature etching processes (open circles) of circular
holes with a diameter of 100 nm.

Fig. 5. Simulated HAR hole etch with signiﬁcant bow formation from a
broader IAD. Ion ﬂuxes with a wide IAD give HAR hole etches a
characteristic bowed proﬁle with a bottom taper. HM, hard mask.

Fig. 4. Cross section and mask morphology for 6 μm deep holes etched
with conventional and low-temperature processes.

conventional etch process, the polymer necking morphology
can be irregular, resulting in uneven species ﬂuxes to the hole
that can lead to sidewall roughness. This mechanism is
suppressed for lean, low-temperature processes as the mask
morphology and necking are more consistent from hole to
hole.
3. Feature-scale model

Various feature-scale models have been developed in the past
a few decades as powerful tools for understanding the etch
proﬁle and processes.12–15) Lam developed a semi-empirical
Monte Carlo model that captures the physics of the ion and
neutral transport effect as well as the surface-level general
chemistry dependences in feature proﬁle evolution. Key
inputs from plasma were based on a reactor-scale model
and molecular dynamic models. Some of the other parameters, such as ion angular distribution (IAD), angular etch
yields, reactive sticking coefﬁcients, and ion scattering
distributions, were empirically derived based on experimental
results. The Monte Carlo method is used to solve the ion ﬂux
dependences within features during evolution.

One of the main advantages of the semi-empirical featurescale model is to be able to capture the etch proﬁle as a
function of etch time, thus revealing how the proﬁle evolves
continuously. Figure 5 shows the simulated proﬁle evolution
during a memory hole etch. In this example, the time
evolution of the hard mask shape and the proﬁle (top CD,
bow CD, and taper) can be tracked. Parameters can be
adjusted to match the simulated proﬁle to experimental
results at ﬁxed time intervals. Upon establishing the model,
we can visualize the impact of varying IAD, ion scattering,
ion enhanced chemical etch components, chemisorption,
desorption, etc. The model results provide a better understanding of ion and neutral transport and reactivity for
channel hole etching at different aspect ratios, thus helping
process development for HAR features. A few key learning
points will be highlighted.
ARDE was simulated for the lean, low-temperature
process. The aspect ratio is deﬁned as the total height of
the hole, including the mask, to the narrowest mask open CD.
Figure 6(a) shows the etch rate of the channel hole ONON
layer and the carbon hard mask plotted against aspect ratio.
Since the carbon hard mask is mainly eroded from the top,
the hard mask etch rate stays relatively constant. The ONON
channel hole layer, on the other hand, exhibits a ﬂat etch rate
up to an aspect ratio of ~60 and decreases at higher aspect
ratios. Figure 6(b) shows the simulated normalized ion ﬂux to
the etch front for perfect cylinder-shaped hole evolution for
different IADs, where the IAD value is 1σ based on a
Gaussian distribution. The ﬂat etch rate at lower aspect ratios
can be partially attributed to very low IADs (<0.5° 1σ).
Similar curves have been reported by Huang et al.13) In
Huang’s SiOx feature-scale model, the SiOx etch rate at
relatively lower aspect ratios reaches a maximum before
decreasing. The initial ﬂatter etch rate in our model can be
attributed to a smaller IAD (e.g. a more broadened peak etch

SI0801-3

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)
(a)

(b)
Fig. 7. Normalized selectivity against aspect ratio. Selectivity is reduced
by 50% going from an aspect ratio of 40 to 140.

Fig. 6. (a) Simulated channel hole etch rate and hard mask etch rate with
hole aspect ratio. The channel hole etch rate is ﬂat at low aspect ratios and
then decreases gradually. (b) Simulated normalized ion ﬂuxes at the etch
front ﬂux for the evolution of a perfect cylinder proﬁle shows comparable ion
ﬂuxes at lower aspect ratios at lower IADs. IADs are assumed to follow a
Gaussian distribution with 1σ speciﬁed.

rate) and modeling the impact of the hard mask polymer neck
on proﬁle evolution. Improving the ARDE effect is key to
enabling ever-increasing stack thicknesses for 3D NAND
ﬂash. As mentioned previously, our low-temperature process
has signiﬁcantly improved ARDE behavior with respect to
etches run at conventional temperatures.
Using the ARDE curve, we also looked at the impact on
bulk hard mask selectivity, which is deﬁned as the ONON
depth etched divided by the hard mask consumed at a
speciﬁed time. Figure 7 shows the normalized selectivity
against aspect ratio. The normalized bulk selectivity is
reduced by roughly 50%, going from an aspect ratio of 40
to 140. Such a decrease in selectivity at increasing ONON
thicknesses is also a challenge.
In addition to capturing ARDE, the feature-scale model
was able to capture hole shape distortion and twisting.
Figure 8 shows some examples of non-ideal hole shapes
compared with an ideal hole shape. An ideal hole is perfectly
circular and centered through the hole etch depth.
Undesirable hole artifacts come in many forms. The hole
can twist, resulting in the center of the hole shifting. The hole

Fig. 8. The ideal hole shape (on the left) is perfectly circular and centered
from top to bottom of the HAR channel hole. Channel holes at very HARs
can exhibit non-ideal hole behavior such as twisting (off center), roughness
(striations), and distortion (deviation from circle shape).

can have a roughness around the edges, sometimes referred to
as striations. Lastly, the hole can be distorted. In the example
in the ﬁgure, the hole is distorted to look more like an ellipse.
Understanding how these non-ideal hole shapes are formed in
a HAR etch is important if 3D NAND is to be enabled.
Experiments show that mask shape can affect the hole
shape and centering. Figure 9 shows a comparison of a mask

Fig. 9. Hard mask (HM) shape can affect hole shape. In this ﬁgure, the top
images represent the top of the HM while the bottom image is the
corresponding hole shape near the bottom of the channel hole layer. An
irregular mask hole shape from heavy polymer deposition can potentially
lead to hole shape distortion and twisting.

SI0801-4

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)

that shows little distortion compared with signiﬁcant distortion due to heavy polymer deposition. The corresponding
hole shape that is transferred to the bottom of the ONON
stack is shown below the respective mask. For the less
distorted mask shape, the holes tend to be circular and
centered. In contrast, the mask with the heavy polymer
deposition results in a distorted bottom ONON hole shape
with some twisting.
These results suggest that hole shape distortion and
twisting can be affected by the mask shape and morphology.
An uneven build-up of polymer on the hard mask can lead to
uneven hard mask shape morphology and be transferred to
the hole feature. The low-temperature and lean HAR ONON
hole etch process that was developed shows good mask
morphology, leading to good hole circularity, as shown in
Fig. 4.
Experimental results conﬁrmed that mask morphology
plays a role in hole shape, but a literature survey suggests
that stochastic ion scattering can also affect the hole
shape.12–15,24) Figure 10 shows a simpliﬁed HAR etch
simulation where the hard mask shape stays constant. That
is, the hard mask is perfectly circular, and hard mask
shadowing species should not contribute to any hole distortions. In this comparison, the number of ion scatters is varied
from 2× to 0×. In the case of 2× scatters, all ion interactions
up to 2× ion scatters are included in the proﬁle evolution.
The top-down view at different etch depths is shown on the
right side of each panel. The “top down” section is a view
from the top of the mask, while other cross sections were
taken at speciﬁed etch depth locations. The ﬁrst location is at
an etch depth of 2000 nm, while the second and third
locations are at 4000 nm and 5500 nm, respectively.
In the absence of ion scattering with a circular hard mask
shape (0× ion scatter), the hole is perfectly centered and
circular. At 1× and 2× ion scatters, hole shape distortion is
apparent at etch depths equal to or deeper than 4000 nm. The
feature-scale model data suggest that ion scattering within the
hole could cause hole distortions. In the absence of hard

mask evolution and for the etch depth studied, no signiﬁcant
twisting of the hole feature was observed.
To capture the effects of a hard mask in addition to ion
scattering, a HAR ONON etch feature-scale model was
developed that captured both the hard mask shape evolution
and the ARDE for the low-temperature etch. Figure 11 shows
the results for the feature proﬁle simulator showing proﬁle
twisting. The ﬁnal proﬁle is shown on the left, while the time
evolution of the hole shape at the hard mask neck and at
different locations in the ONON proﬁle are shown on the
right. Near the top of the hole, the hole proﬁle maintains its
circular shape. Early in the etch, the bottom of the hole shows
a triangular shape that eventually expands in size to become
more circular as the etch progresses. The very bottom of the
hole at longer times is elliptical and off-centered. The
simulation results show the time evolution of a distorted
hole can become more circular with time at the same depth.
Also, early hole shape distortion can lead to hole distortion
transfer deeper in the etch, probably due to uneven ion
scattering.

Fig. 10. Feature proﬁle model with a non-evolving hard mask (no hard
mask etch or polymer deposition) to study the effect of ion scattering on hole
shape irregularity. Hole shape distortion is apparent only when ions scatter.

Fig. 11. Feature proﬁle simulator modeling both hard mask (HM)
evolution and the channel hole etch. When HM evolution and ion scattering
are modeled, hole shape distortion and twisting can be captured.

4. DECO silicon nitride tier optimization

While HAR etching plays the most signiﬁcant role in
patterning channel holes, dielectric ONON ﬁlm deposition
is another crucial area of focus. Since the nitride ﬁlm (SiN) in
the ONON pair is a sacriﬁcial layer that is eventually
replaced with W at a later stage, it provides opportunities
to look at possibilities of optimizing nitride ﬁlms at different
tiers to enable better control of channel hole shape during
etching. After HAR etching, the proﬁle in general shows a
bottom pinch-off, with the upper/middle region showing a
bowing proﬁle. Figure 12 illustrates the tier optimization
strategy with DECO to reach a more vertical proﬁle
throughout. For the bowing proﬁle, the nitride ﬁlm at the
bow location can be replaced with a nitride with less lateral
etch component, and the proﬁle bow can be improved. For

SI0801-5

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)

Fig. 14. Top tier SiN ﬁlm change impact on BB bias (largest bow CD –
bottom CD) reduction.

Fig. 12. Film tier optimization strategy in DECO to enlarge the bottom CD
and reduce the bowing proﬁle near the middle region.

the bottom narrow hole CD, one can explore nitride ﬁlms
with a higher lateral etch rate as well as more bottom tiers to
enlarge the bottom CD. The co-optimization between HAR
etching and a ONON ﬁlm provides new opportunities to
enable ever-increasing numbers of ONON layers.
Although the silicon nitride ﬁlm is a sacriﬁcial layer,
maintaining the material properties of the ﬁlm for the overall
integration ﬂow presents new challenges during tier optimization. Film modulus and stress correlate with the mechanical
and thermal stability of the overall structure. Film composition, such as hydrogen content, could inﬂuence the overall
stack integrity during the subsequent steps in the ﬂow. The
wet clean removal rate is another element to be considered,
such that the proﬁle is not negatively impacted during the
subsequent carbon mask strip and wet clean steps. Overall,
tier co-optimization should show little to no impact on
upstream and downstream integration ﬂows to ensure no
negative impact on device performance.
For the silicon oxide ﬁlm, since the ﬁlm is part of the
memory cell, tier optimization has additional constraints
besides the elements mentioned above for silicon nitride.
Additional components, such as dielectric breakdown voltage, should also be taken into consideration. We also need to
pay attention to the potential interactions between nitride and
oxide ﬁlms at later stages of the integration ﬂow. Examples
of silicon nitride ﬁlm tier optimization for bow proﬁle
reduction are shown in Figs. 13 and 14.

Fig. 13. Bottom tier SiN ﬁlm change impact on BB bias (largest bow CD –
bottom CD) reduction.

For HAR proﬁle control, BB bias, deﬁned as the difference
between the largest bow CD and the bottom CD, is often used
as the key metric to deﬁne how vertical a hole proﬁle is. A
near zero BB bias indicates a perfectly vertical proﬁle. There
are two ways to reduce the BB bias, either by enlarging the
bottom CD while keeping the bow CD from increasing or by
reducing the bow CD while keeping the bottom CD from
decreasing. To enlarge the bottom CD, nitride ﬁlms with
higher lateral etch rates were placed at the bottom tiers. As
indicated in Fig. 13, when the bottom 10% of SiN tiers are
replaced with softer ﬁlms, BB bias is improved by 35%
compared with the baseline. When 20% of the bottom tiers
are replaced with softer ﬁlm, a BB bias reduction of up to
53% is achieved. In this experiment, the top portion of the
proﬁle was unchanged, and only the portion of the altered
tiers was enlarged. The replaced SiN ﬁlm was tuned so that
all other metrics could be maintained while the lateral etch
rate was enhanced.
Alternatively, BB bias reduction can also focus on reducing the bow CD near the top while keeping the bottom CD
unchanged. Figure 14 shows the results of a bow CD
reduction of 18% compared with baseline when the top
portion of the SiN tiers is replaced with lower lateral etch rate
ﬁlms compared to baseline. Ideally, combining both top tier
and bottom tier optimization could bring further proﬁle
improvement to reach a more vertical hole proﬁle.
5. DECO carbon liner approach

For HAR proﬁle control, managing polymer passivation on
the sidewalls for proﬁle control is one of the most challenging aspects during HAR etching. For a HAR Si etch, for
example, etch and deposition or cycling schemes have been
used in the past to manage lateral CD growth while
maintaining deep etch depths. A deposition and etch cycling
process for deep Si etching is one such example, where
reactive SF6 and C4F8 are cycled alternately to balance the
etch rate and proﬁle.25,26) For HAR dielectric ﬁlms, however,
this kind of cycling process does not work well due to the
extremely narrow window between etching and deposition
for proﬁle control. In situ carbon ﬁlm deposition as passivation in the etch chamber often results in mask clogging for
the hole dimensions of concern. In addition, polymer buildup on the mask and proﬁle can lead to striation of the proﬁle
sidewalls due to uneven polymer build-up under the subsequent high-power HAR etch step.24) Recently, Kumakura
et al.27) reported applying coverage-controlled atomic layer
deposition (ALD) silicon oxide ﬁlm to reduce the proﬁle

SI0801-6

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)

Fig. 15. Carbon liner scheme and hole impact on CD with and without a
carbon liner.

bowing in HAR contact hole etching. While the use of ALD
SiO2 ﬁlm to protect sidewalls is effective in some process
regions, the low selectivity of sidewall passivation to the
dielectric ﬁlm may present some limitations in HAR ONON
channel hole applications.
Depositing a carbon liner in a high-temperature deposition
chamber, however, provides a new process window for HAR
etching. The carbon liner can reach a similar etch resistance
to the carbon mask material, and the conformality of the
liners can be tailored to protect the bow CD location of the
channel hole. The general concept of a carbon liner scheme is
illustrated in Fig. 15 in the left panel. Bow CD in general is
increased with a longer etch time at deeper etch depths. A
carbon liner is inserted after the initial partial etching (before
the bow CD is enlarged too much). Then the last partial etch
is continued to full etch depth. The carbon liner provides
extra protection to prevent bow CD growth during the last
partial etch. As shown in Fig. 14 in the right panel, liner
insertion effectively prevented the growth of the top CD bow
while allowing more room to enlarge the bottom CD. BB bias
reduction of 30% is achieved comparing the with and without
liner approaches.
While the liner approach is attractive, co-optimization of
etching and liner is necessary to fully realize the value of
liner insertion. There could be strong interactions between the
liner and the HAR process, especially during the opening of
the bottom CD after liner insertion. Liner material conformality needs to be tailored so that sidewall protection is placed
in the bow location with less sidewall deposition near the
bottom to allow more room to open the bottom CD.
Throughput and productivity also need to be balanced to
reach high-volume production. Overall, a carbon liner is a
novel approach to enable more tiers for next-generation
nodes.
6. Conclusions

Due to attenuation in ion and neutral ﬂuxes reaching the
bottom of features, ARDE is the major bottleneck for ONON
HAR channel hole etching. A new etch process operating at
low temperature showed an improved etch rate. Low
temperature coupled with lean chemistry open the process
window to a regime with less polymer deposition, thus
improving ARDE and hole shape control. XPS surface
analysis showed that the new process had signiﬁcantly less

polymer formation, leading to more circular hole shapes,
while typical CxFy chemistry showed a high CxFy polymer on
top of the etching ﬁlm, resulting in more irregular hole
shapes.
A semi-empirical Monte Carlo feature-scale model was
developed, and the simulated etch proﬁle progression and
aspect ratio dependence matched the experimental data. The
model data revealed that ion scattering within the hole could
cause hole distortions in the absence of mask shape evolution. Combining mask shape evolution and ion scattering in
the hole in the model revealed that hole distortion and
twisting could occur and were magniﬁed at deeper etch
depths.
DECO tier ﬁlm modulation can provide an additional
window for channel hole proﬁle control. Replacing bottom
tier silicon nitride with a higher lateral etch rate resulted in an
improvement of >50% in BB bias, while varying top tier
resulted in a BB bias improvement of 18%. Combining both
top and bottom tier optimization could lead to further
improvement.
Liner insertion is another highly effective way to prevent
top CD bow growth while enlarging the bottom CD. An
improvement of up to 30% in BB bias can be achieved when
comparing the with and without liner approaches. Detailed
process mapping between the ﬁrst partial etch, liners, and the
ﬁnal partial etch could provide further improvement.
Acknowledgments

We would like to express thanks to Professor Chang’s group
from UCLA for the XPS analysis results.

1) H. Tanaka et al., “Bit cost scalable technology with punch and plug process
for ultra high density ﬂash memory,” 2007 IEEE Symp. on VLSI
Technology, 2007, p. 14, 10.1109/VLSIT.2007.4339708.
2) Ki-Tae Park, D. K. Byeon, and D.-H. Kim, “A world's ﬁrst product of threedimensional vertical NAND Flash memory and beyond,” 4th Annual NonVolatile Memory Technology Symp. (NVMTS), 2014, p. 1, doi:10.1109/
NVMTS.2014.7060840.
3) J. Choe, eBook: 2022 and Beyond for Memory Technology (TechInsights,
Otawa, ON Canada, 2022), https://www.techinsights.com/ebook/memory/
ebook-2022-and-beyond-memory-technology.
4) H. Singh, Overcoming challenges in 3D NAND volume manufacturing
Semiconductor Digest (2017), https://sst.semiconductor-digest.com/2017/07/
overcoming-challenges-in-3d-nand-volume-manufacturing/.
5) K. Ishikawa, K. Karahashi, T. Ishijima, S. I. Cho, S. Elliott, D. Hausmann,
D. Mocuta, A. Wilson, and K. Kinoshita, “Progress in nanoscale dry
processes for fabrication of high-aspect-ratio features: how can we control
critical dimension uniformity at the bottom?,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 57, 6S2
(2018).
6) T. E. F. M. Standaert, C. Hedlund, E. A. Joseph, and G. S. Oehrlein, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. A 22, 53 (2004).
7) T. Iwase, Y. Kamaji, S. Y. Kang, K. Koga, N. Kuboi, M. Nakamua,
N. Negishi, T. Nozaki, S. Nunomura, and D. Ogawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58,
SE0802 (2019).
8) V. M. Donnelly and A. Kornblit, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 31, 050825 (2013).
9) D. Zhang and M. J. Kushner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 19, 524 (2001).
10) M. Matsui, T. Usui, and T. Ono, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 56, 06HB03 (2017).
11) T. Iwase, K. Yokogawa, and M. Mori, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 56, 06HB04 (2017).
12) C. M. Huard, Y. Zhang, S. Sriraman, A. Paterson, K. J. Kanarik, and
M. J. Kushner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 35, 031306 (2017).
13) S. Huang, C. Huard, S. Shim, S. K. Nam, I.-C. Song, S. Lu, and
M. J. Kushner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 37, 031304 (2019).
14) S. Huang, S. Shim, S. K. Nam, and M. J. Kushner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A
38, 023001 (2020).
15) Y. G. Yook, H. S. You, J. H. Park, W. S. Chang, D. C. Kwon, J. S. Yoon,
K. H. Yoon, S. S. Shin, D. H. Yu, and Y. H. Im, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 55,
255202 (2022).

SI0801-7

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

PROGRESS REVIEW

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 62, SI0801 (2023)
16) M. Shen et al., Proc. SPIE 11615, 1161501 (2021).
17) M. Shen et al., SEMICON2022, https://www.semiconkorea.org/en/node/
5246.
18) J. F. O’Hanlon, A User’s Guide to Vacuum Technology (Wiley-Interscience,
New Jersey, 2003).
19) J. W. Coburn and H. F. Winters, Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 2730 (1989).
20) T. Lill, I. L. Berry, M. Shen, J. Hoang, A. Fischer, T. Panagopoulos,
J. P. Chang, and V. Vahedi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 41, 023005 (2023).
21) A. Argönül and F. J. Keil, Period. Polytech. Chem. Eng. 52, 37 (2008).
22) M. Miyake, N. Negishi, M. Izawa, Ke Yokogawa, M. Oyama, and
T. Kanekiyo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 48, 08HE01 (2009).

23) N. Negishi, M. Miyake, K. Yokogawa, M. Oyama, T. Kanekiyo, and
M. Izawa, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 35, 051205 (2017).
24) M. Omura, J. Hashimoto, T. Adachi, Y. Kondo, M. Ishikawa, J. Abe,
I. Sakai, H. Hayashi, M. Sekine, and M. Hori, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58,
SEEB02 (2019).
25) G. H. Lee, S. Hwang, J. Yu, and H. Kim, Appl. Sci. 11, 6703
(2021).
26) B. Wu, A. Kumar, and S. Pamarthy, J. Appl. Phys. 108, 051101
(2010).
27) S. Kumakura, H. Sasagawa, T. Nishizuka, Y. Kihara, and M. Honda, Jpn. J.
Appl. Phys. 61, SI1015 (2022).

SI0801-8

© 2023 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

