micromachines
Article

Effect of Mask Geometry Variation on Plasma Etching Profiles †
Josip Bobinac 1 , Tobias Reiter 1 , Julius Piso 2 , Xaver Klemenschits 2,3 , Oskar Baumgartner 3 ,
Zlatan Stanojevic 3 , Georg Strof 3 , Markus Karner 3 and Lado Filipovic 1, *
1

2

3

*
†

Citation: Bobinac, J.; Reiter, T.; Piso,
J.; Klemenschits, X.; Baumgartner, O.;
Stanojevic, Z.; Strof, G.; Karner, M.;
Filipovic, L. Effect of Mask Geometry
Variation on Plasma Etching Profiles.
Micromachines 2023, 14, 665. https://
doi.org/10.3390/mi14030665
Academic Editor: Sergey Y. Yurish
Received: 25 January 2023
Revised: 11 March 2023

Christian Doppler Laboratory for Multi-Scale Process Modeling of Semiconductor Devices and Sensors at the
Institute for Microelectronics, TU Wien, Gußhausstraße 27-29/E360, 1040 Vienna, Austria;
bobinac@iue.tuwien.ac.at (J.B.); reiter@iue.tuwien.ac.at (T.R.)
Institute for Microelectronics, TU Wien, Gußhausstraße 27-29/E360, 1040 Vienna, Austria;
piso@iue.tuwien.ac.at (J.P.); klemenschits@iue.tuwien.ac.at (X.K.)
Global TCAD Solutions GmbH, Bösendorferstraße 1, Stiege 1, Top12, 1010 Vienna, Austria;
o.baumgartner@globaltcad.com (O.B.); z.stanojevic@globaltcad.com (Z.S.); g.strof@globaltcad.com (G.S.);
m.karner@globaltcad.com (M.K.)
Correspondence: filipovic@iue.tuwien.ac.at; Tel.: +43-1-58801-36036
This paper is an extended version of our paper published in In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Microelectronic Devices and Technologies (MicDAT) 2022, Corfu, Greece,
21–23 September 2022.

Abstract: It is becoming quite evident that, when it comes to the further scaling of advanced node
transistors, increasing the flash memory storage capacity, and enabling the on-chip integration of multiple functionalities, “there’s plenty of room at the top”. The fabrication of vertical, three-dimensional
features as enablers of these advanced technologies in semiconductor devices is commonly achieved
using plasma etching. Of the available plasma chemistries, SF6 /O2 is one of the most frequently
applied. Therefore, having a predictive model for this process is indispensable in the design cycle of
semiconductor devices. In this work, we implement a physical SF6 /O2 plasma etching model which
is based on Langmuir adsorption and is calibrated and validated to published equipment parameters.
The model is implemented in a broadly applicable in-house process simulator ViennaPS, which
includes Monte Carlo ray tracing and a level set-based surface description. We then use the model to
study the impact of the mask geometry on the feature profile, when etching through circular and
rectangular mask openings. The resulting dimensions of a cylindrical hole or trench can vary greatly
due to variations in mask properties, such as its etch rate, taper angle, faceting, and thickness. The
peak depth for both the etched cylindrical hole and trench occurs when the mask is tapered at about
0.5°, and this peak shifts towards higher angles in the case of high passivation effects during the etch.
The minimum bowing occurs at the peak depth, and it increases with an increasing taper angle. For
thin-mask faceting, it is observed that the maximum depth increases with an increasing taper angle,
without a significant variation between thin masks. Bowing is observed to be at a maximum when
the mask taper angle is between 15° and 20°. Finally, the mask etch rate variation, describing the
etching of different mask materials, shows that, when a significant portion of the mask is etched away,
there is a notable increase in vertical etching and a decrease in bowing. Ultimately, the implemented
model and framework are useful for providing a guideline for mask design rules.

Accepted: 14 March 2023
Published: 16 March 2023

Keywords: SF6 /O2 ; plasma etching; high-aspect-ratio structures; 3D integration; mask tapering;
mask faceting; mask geometry; modeling and simulation; process TCAD

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
As transistor scaling of planar field-effect transistors (FETs) started to reach its physical
limit, vertical gate geometries were developed to overcome them and the FinFET structure
was born, which dominates the current landscape at advanced technology nodes [1,2]. IBM
has also recently announced that they are working on a vertical transistor architecture, in
an attempt to effectively continue scaling along Moore’s Law [3] by taking advantage of

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi14030665

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/micromachines

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

2 of 16

the vertical dimension. The microelectronics industry has also been looking for solutions
for the integration of applications beyond memory and logic on the same die, such as radio
frequency (RF) circuits, power electronics, and sensors. This type of three-dimensional
(3D) integration, termed More-than-Moore [4], requires functional diversification and electrical connections through the entire thickness of a wafer, which can be several hundred
micrometers, typically using through-silicon vias (TSVs) [5–7]. Furthermore, the memory
capacity of modern 3D NAND-based storage is limited by the total number of sequential
conductive and insulating stacked layers which form the NAND gate. The fabrication
of these gates relies on etching through silicon dioxide (SiO2 ) and silicon nitride (Si3 N4 )
stacks [8]. Therefore, to increase the memory capacity, more stacks need to be used, which
is currently limited to 128 [9]. This limitation is primarily a consequence of the etching
step, which still relies on a plasma chemistry. Finally, plasma-etched nanowire arrays are
emerging as a new class of high-aspect-ratio microstructures in silicon for next-generation
energy harvesting such as thermoelectrics [10] and for storage devices, such as lithium
ion batteries [11,12].
It is becoming evident that further scaling of digital logic, increase in memory storage
capacity, improvements in energy harvesting and battery technology, and the functional
integration on a single die all rely on vertical integration. In 1959, Richard Feynman
famously observed that “there’s plenty of room at the bottom” to indicate the tremendous
importance of scaling and the revolutionary potential of exploring and exploiting quantum
phenomena in semiconductor devices [13]. However, for additive manufacturing (AM), it is
becoming quite evident that the opposite is simultaneously true and that vertical integration
is principally important, meaning that “there’s plenty of room at the top” [14–16].
To fulfill the promise of efficiently using the vertical dimension, the fabrication of
ever-higher high-aspect-ratio (HAR) structures is becoming critical. At the same time, the
demand for HAR geometries is increasing and testing every possible setting experimentally
is incredibly expensive and time-consuming, which is why physical models have become
an indispensable tool in the design cycle. Plasma etching is one of the most frequently
used fabrication steps to generate such structures; however, the process is quite complex
and providing a predictive model which includes all relevant physics is a challenging task.
Nevertheless, physical models are essential since their only alternative involves repeated
experiments which involve many trial-and-error procedures, due to the sheer complexity
of plasma etching [17].
The increased need for etching of HAR structures is driving further mask innovation [18]. There are many nonidealities which arise due to variations in mask geometry,
such as mask erosion and undercutting during etching. Additionally, variations in lithography, which is becoming more complex, can cause significant mask variations. Physical
simulations are essential in order to be able to qualify and quantify the impact of these
variations on the final fabricated profile. The model used for analyzing the impact also
must be integrated within a complete process simulator and combined with many other
processing steps in order to generate entire devices and even circuits. Only this way, can a
realizable design-technology co-optimization (DTCO) strategy be applied to study future
device designs. This paper, for the first time, uses a physical model which includes particle
reflections and is implemented in a fully fledged process simulation framework, to study
the impact of several mask variations in the commonly applied SF6 /O2 plasma etching
system. Most previous studies make several assumptions about the mask [17], but this is
becoming insufficient to fully identify its impact on the final etched features. Our approach
shows that the SF6 /O2 model and framework implementation can capture the complete
picture of the simulated material stack and system.
In order to fabricate HAR structures, deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) is commonly
applied, which consists of cycles of plasma etching followed by a conformal deposition of
a passivating layer [19]. The passivating layer at the bottom of the structure is sputtered
away by ion impact, while the sidewalls remain covered and prevent lateral etching. The
implemented model represents a commonly applied plasma chemistry which involves

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

3 of 16

using SF6 in a plasma, whereby fluoride (F) is the dominant chemical etch species [20,21].
The addition of O2 forms a protective layer during the etch phase. The protective layer is
inert to chemical reactions with the fluoride and inhibits etching. The ionic species, which
are formed in the plasma, are accelerated vertically, resulting in a highly directional sputter
etching of the substrate. The ions also remove the oxidized surface at the bottom of the
trench, allowing for the fluoride to etch at these locations chemically. Overall, analogous to
the impact of the deposited conformal layer, the result is that the sidewalls are shielded,
as ions do not tend to sputter the sidewall, since they are primarily directed towards the
bottom, allowing to obtain HAR holes. The precise geometry of the etched hole depends
on the mask opening and its shape. In DRIE, since a passivating layer is directly deposited
on the sidewall, it is not sputtered by ion impact and the entire sidewall effectively serves
as a mask in the subsequent etching step. Therefore, understanding the impact of this mask
(i.e., all layers above the layer to be etched) on the etch rate is crucial for controlling and
optimizing the process.
In order to assess the impact of the mask layer on the final etched profile of an
HAR hole, we implemented the physical SF6 /O2 plasma etching model in the level setbased process simulator ViennaPS [22], which uses the level set library ViennaLS [23] for
surface storage and to calculate the level set equation, as well as the ray tracing library
ViennaRay [24] for Monte Carlo ray tracing. The model was calibrated and validated by
matching the simulated profiles of cylindrical holes to experimental measurements from
literature [25]. The model was then applied to qualitatively study the influence of a tapered
mask and mask faceting, mask etch rate, and mask thickness on the etched hole profiles.
2. Simulation Workflow
The simulation of plasma etching requires the definition of multiple materials and their
interfaces, which we apply using the level set approach, as shown in the workflow given in
Figure 1. The atoms, molecules, and ions are stochastically modeled using particles which
represent several hundred or thousand physical atoms, molecules, or ions. Their movement
in the plasma reactor is treated using continuum transport equations [26], while their
motion near the surface is treated ballistically using ray tracing, as continuum equations
are not valid at that scale [26,27]. Once a particle strikes the surface, represented using a
level set description, a kinetic surface chemistry model is applied at the intersection of a
particle ray and the surface, which includes sputtering, chemical etching, and reflections.
This flow follows the typical top-down Monte Carlo ray tracing depicted in Figure 2 and
described in [27–30]. Alternatively, bottom-up simulations have also been used for these
types of simulations, albeit with severe restrictions on modeling particle reflections [17].

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the employed simulation flow. The starting point is obtaining
fluxes which capture particle transport in the plasma chamber. The fluxes are then used to obtain
the particle fluxes which impinge on each surface element and to calculate their coverage, which in
turn serves as an input for modeling reactions on the surface. Reactions at the surface produce rates
which are used to obtain velocities and move (advect) the surface by solving the level set equation.

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

4 of 16

Figure 2. Schematic depiction of particle rays being traced from the source plane to the surface. The
particles describe either neutral atoms or molecules (blue) or ions (red), governed by the source
distribution fluxes Γn and Γi , respectively. The fluxes define the distribution of particle directions
and energies. Specular reflections are shown for ions, and diffuse reflections for neutral species.

2.1. Implicit Surface Representation
The level set method is a form of implicit surface representation, where the surface is
described by a signed distance function (SDF) φ(~x ) defined at all points in space [31,32].
The function is typically defined on a Cartesian grid with signed distance values defined at
each point. The surface is then located where the SDF is equal to a specific scalar value,
typically zero. In this case, the surface is said to be the zero level set. The SDF φ(~x ) is
constructed based on the signed distance d of a domain point ~x from the surface S bounding
the volume M:

 −d, ~x ∈ M
φ(~x ) =
(1)
~x ∈ S
0,

d, ~x ∈
/M
The sign of φ(~x ), whether negative or positive, indicates whether the point is inside or
outside the volume M, respectively. In this way, it is immediately known whether a point is
inside or outside the volume, simply by examining the sign of the SDF. The time evolution
of the surface is described by the surface normal velocity v(~x ). For a typical geometry with
nonconstant SDF gradients, the gradient is used to normalize v(~x ), which leads to the level
set equation:
δφ(~x, t)
(2)
+ v(~x )|∇φ(~x, t)| = 0
δt
Since Equation (2) is a form of the Hamilton–Jacobi equations, many algorithms exist
which are able to solve it using finite-difference schemes [33,34]. The resulting velocity
is subsequently used to update the SDF φ(~x ) and these values are typically stored at the
points defined on a regular grid. As the surface evolves, the points remain at the same
position while their SDF value changes [29].
2.2. Surface Kinetics Model
To describe the temporal simulation of feature-scale SF6 /O2 plasma etching, we consider the rates of ions and neutral particles – oxygen and fluorine – along with their surface
coverages at each time step. Ray tracing is employed to compute particle impingement
rates which are, in turn, used to compute the surface coverage of relevant species and
ultimately to calculate the surface velocity or etch rate (ER). The etch rate (ER) is then used
to extract the effective velocities at all defined points ~x in space v(~x ), which are used to
solve the level set Equation (2). The ER is determined by three physical phenomena:
•

Chemical etching: The fluorine reacts with the exposed silicon surface, releasing SiF4
as a by-product [35]. The chemical reaction which governs this process above 100 °C

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

5 of 16

is given by [36]
Si + 2 SF6 (g) −−→ SiF4 (g) + 2 SF4 (g) .
•

•

(3)

Physical sputtering: Ions in the chamber will strike the wafer surface, resulting in the
physical sputtering of silicon atoms away from the surface. This will, however, only
take place if the incident ions have an energy above a critical threshold energy Eth .
Ion-enhanced etching, also known as reactive ion etching (RIE): fluorine-saturated
silicon surfaces are more prone to being physically sputtered, meaning that the critical
threshold energy to emit a silicon atom is reduced, when compared to the physical
sputtering process [37].

Therefore, the model must be able to track the coverages of fluorine and oxygen
on the silicon surface, given by θ F and θO , respectively. These are calculated using a
Langmuir–Hinshelwood type surface-site balance equation [38] which is given by:
σSi

dθ F
= γF Γ F (1 − θ F − θO ) − kσSi θ F − 2Yie Γi θ F
dt

(4)

dθO
= γO ΓO (1 − θ F − θO ) − βσSi θO − YO Γi θO
(5)
dt
Here, σSi is the surface site density of silicon; Γ F , ΓO , and Γi are the fluorine, oxygen, and
ion fluxes, respectively; γF and γO are the sticking coefficients for fluorine and oxygen on
a clean silicon surface, respectively; k is the chemical etch reaction rate constant; β is the
oxygen recombination rate constant; and Yie and YO are the total ion-enhanced and oxygen
etching rates, respectively, which are linked to the ion energies in the reactor [27].
Assuming steady-state conditions, Equations (4) and (5) can be set to zero, resulting in
the following equations for the surface coverage values:
σSi

"
θF = 1 +
"
θO = 1 +

kσSi + 2Yie Γi
γF Γ F
βσSi + Yie Γi
γO ΓO

!

!

γO ΓO
1+
βσSi + YO Γi

!#−1

γF Γ F
1+
kσSi + 2Yie Γi

!#−1

(6)

(7)

The steady-state assumption is valid since the incoming fluxes of all particles are
relatively high, on the order of 1016 –1019 cm−2 s−1 and the velocities of particles in the
plasma are much faster than the ER, which is on the order of several nanometers per
second [17]. Since it is well established that oxygen does not directly cause the removal of
silicon, meaning it does not contribute to the etch rate, only the fluorine and ion species
result in surface removal. Numerically, this means that the oxygen species only serves to
reduce the concentration of fluorine from the surface, as can be seen from the right side of
Equation (6), where increasing oxygen flux ΓO causes a reduction in θ F . Finally, the etch
rate is given by
!
1 kσSi θ F
ER =
+ Yp Γi + Yie Γi θ F ,
(8)
ρSi
4
where ρSi is the silicon density. The first, second, and third terms in the brackets of
Equation (8) reflect the chemical etching, physical sputtering, and ion-enhanced etch components, respectively, as described above.
3. Model Calibration
The implemented model was calibrated to the experimental data from Belen et al. [25]
to ensure that the model could correctly capture the changes in the chamber gas composition, the applied RF bias, the chamber pressure, and the feature size. The fluorine and

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

6 of 16

oxygen fluxes, Γ F and ΓO , respectively, were varied to model the composition of the chamber gas. The ion energy encapsulated the effect of the applied RF bias, and the pressure was
not modeled directly but was instead included in the model by matching the simulations
to experimentally obtained profiles. The calibration procedure for the model is described
in more detail in Belen et al. [25] and Bobinac et al. [39]. This calibration was performed on
a cylindrical mask with top and bottom diameters of 0.4 µm and 0.35 µm, respectively, and
a thickness of 1.2 µm.
In Figure 3a, we show the capability of the model to capture more isotropic etch
profiles, where no oxygen is present in the feed gas. The model is able to capture complex
phenomena, such as a temporary increase in the vertical etch rate, when the ratio of O2 gas
to SF6 gas increases from 0.44 to 0.5. Further increasing the oxygen content reduces the
overall etch rate, as intuitively expected. Figure 3 shows the scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) cross sections from Belen et al. [25] overlaid with the calibrated model in green.
From the setups containing oxygen in the feed gas, (Figure 3b–e), the lowest oxygen
content results in the highest lateral etch rate, shown in Figure 3b. When the oxygen flux
is increased, the sidewall passivation becomes more pronounced and lateral etching is
decreased. Increased sidewall oxygen coverage directs more fluorine flux towards the
bottom of the hole, resulting in a higher vertical etch yield, shown in Figure 3c. Further
increasing the oxygen content results in a negative (inward) sidewall tapering and an
inhibition of vertical etching, as observed in Figure 3d and, to a greater extent, in Figure 3e.

Figure 3. Diagonal slices through a 3D-simulated (green) and SEM cross sections of cylindrical hole
profiles from Belen et al. [25] (black). The increasing presence of O2 hinders lateral etching while
initially enhancing vertical etching (a–c). Further increasing the O2 flux leads to negative sidewall
tapering and a reduction in the vertical etching (d,e). The oxide mask–Si interface is depicted with a
white dashed line. (Reprinted with permission from [25]). Copyright 2005, American Vacuum Society.

In order to capture the changing chamber pressure in the model, it must be understood
that increasing the pressure results in a direct increase in the fluorine and oxygen fluxes
(neutral species) and a reduction in the ion flux. At low pressures, the inhibiting effect of
oxygen coverage is less significant and we observe outward sidewall tapering, as depicted
in Figure 4. As the pressure increases, despite a decreased ion flux, vertical etching slightly
increases due to the same effect of more fluorine reflecting towards the bottom, depicted
in Figure 4b. Further increasing the pressure inhibits both vertical and lateral etching and

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

7 of 16

changes the sidewall tapering from negative (outward) to positive (inward), as depicted in
Figure 4c.

Figure 4. Diagonal slices through a 3D-simulated (green) and experimental (black) cylindrical hole
profiles at increasing chamber pressures: (a) 10 mTorr; (b) 25 mTorr; (c) 40 mTorr. The oxide mask–Si
interface is depicted with a white dashed line. (Reprinted with permission from [25]). Copyright
2005, American Vacuum Society.

4. Results and Discussion
There are many reasons why masks may not have the perfect geometry, as is often
assumed in plasma simulations [40]. The physical model presented here, using top-down
Monte Carlo ray tracing, is able to qualitatively reproduce and predict many phenomena observed in plasma etched profiles. This includes loading, RIE lag, mask faceting,
microtrenching, undercutting, sidewall tapering, notching, and overcutting, depicted in
Figure 5 from Donnelly and Kornblit [38]. To quantify these effects, typically some calibration is necessary in order to ensure that the model can accurately represent the specific
equipment being used.
We finally use our model for a qualitative insight into the impact of varying mask
geometries on the etched feature profile. The parameters from Table 1 were applied to the
model, which was calibrated to physical conditions of a total gas flow rate in the chamber of
80 sccm at a pressure of 25 mTorr, an inductive coil power of 800 W, and an RF-bias voltage
of −120 V at a wafer temperature of 5 °C. The gas flow rate of O2 was varied from 35 sccm
to 50 sccm, corresponding to the oxygen yield yO2 varying from 0.44 to 0.62, respectively,
with the rest of the flow being that of SF6 as described in [25].

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

8 of 16

(a) bowing

(b) microtrenching

(c) undercutting

(d) tapering

(e) notching

(f) overcutting

Figure 5. Effects of plasma etching on the final profile: (a) bowing due to mask faceting; (b) microtrenching due to an enhanced ion flux along the sidewall; (c) undercutting due to an isotropic
component in the etch process; (d) sidewall tapering due to sidewall inhibition or deposition of
polymer on the sidewall; (e) notching at the interface with an etch-stop layer due to inadequate sidewall passivation or charging effects; (f) Re-entrant profile (overcutting) due to inadequate sidewall
passivation and/or ion scattering. (Reprinted with permission from Donnelly and Kornblit [38]).
Table 1. Parameters used for the mask study, which correspond to a chamber with a total gas flow
rate of 80 sccm at a pressure of 25 mTorr, an inductive coil power of 800 W, and an RF-bias voltage of
−120 V at a wafer temperature of 5 °C. The gas flow rates of the individual gases were 40 sccm SF6
and 40 sccm O2 , as described in [25].
Parameter

Oxygen Fraction in Feed Gas yO2

Unit

0.44

0.5

0.56

0.62

Fluorine flux Γ F

5.5 × 1018

5 × 1018

4 × 1018

3 × 1018

cm−2 s−1

Oxygen flux ΓO

2 × 1017

3 × 1017

1 × 1018

1.5 × 1018

cm−2 s−1

Ion flux Γi

1 × 1016

1 × 1016

1 × 1016

1 × 1016

cm−2 s−1

F sticking on Si γF

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.7

1

O sticking on Si γO

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1

Si density ρSi

5 × 1022

5 × 1022

5 × 1022

5 × 1022

atoms cm−3

O recombination rate βσSi

5 × 1013

5 × 1013

5 × 1013

5 × 1013

cm−2 s−1

Reaction rate constant kσSi

3 × 1017

3 × 1017

3 × 1017

3 × 1017

cm−2 s−1

Si yield proportionality
constant ASi

7.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

1

O yield proportionality
constant AO

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

1

4.1. Impact of Mask Tapering
Using the model parameters listed in Table 1, we studied the impact of tapering of
a 1.2 µm thick cylindrical mask with an opening diameter of 0.4 µm. The mask tapering
angle, illustrated in Figure 6, was varied from 0° to 4° during the simulations in order to
assess its impact on the etched profile, with the results shown in Figure 7. A similar study
was performed on the impact of fluorocarbon etching of SiO2 and halogen gas etching of
Si in 3D NAND memory stacks [41,42]. These studies were able to qualify the effects of

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

9 of 16

the previously etched layers on the etching rate and sidewall tapering of the bottom of the
HAR structure. The predictive modeling of these phenomena helps to optimize the process
by allowing for a slight outward tapering in the SiO2 layer, followed by a slight inward
tapering of the silicon layer.

Figure 6. Illustration of the taper angle α. For the impact of the mask tapering angle, small angles
on relatively thick masks are considered. In mask faceting, ion bombardment sputters away the top
mask corner and results in an effective taper angle as well. However, the angles tend to be larger and
the impact is analyzed for thin masks.

(a) 0°

(b) 0.5°

(c) 2°

(d) 3°

(e) 4°

Figure 7. Cross sections of the etched cylindrical holes obtained by varying the mask tapering from
perfectly vertical at 0° to 4° for yO2 = 0.5. Both the increased vertical etch rate with slight tapering
and the effects of bowing are reproduced.

The initial increase in the mask taper angle from 0° to 0.5° enhanced the vertical
etching, since more ions were directly reflected towards the bottom. Effectively, this was a
similar phenomenon as the one leading to microtrenching, since it involved ions grazing off
of the sidewalls and contributing to a faster etch rate at the hole bottom. As the taper angle
was increased, the ions redirected off of the mask at a more lateral angle, resulting in an
increased sidewall etching and bowing. As the mask taper angle was further increased, the
ions were redirected towards the sidewall closer to the top of the hole, shifting the bowing
effect closer to the mask layer.

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

10 of 16

In Figure 8, we note the effective changes in the final cylindrical trench geometry for
varied chamber gas compositions detailed in Table 1, represented as the final depth and the
width at half-depth (WAHD), while the mask taper angle was varied. The maximum depth
for yO2 = 0.44 and yO2 = 0.5 was reached when the tapering angle was low but not zero,
at around 0.5°. A further increase in the oxygen concentration in the feed gas shifted the
maximum depth towards higher angles. The bowing effect, captured by the WAHD, was
more pronounced in the low-oxygen-content settings due to a weaker passivation effect
on the sidewalls. The WAHD was shown to be at its minimum for the mask taper angles
at which the hole depths were at their maximum. This was shown to be the case for all
chamber gas compositions as these were the points where the most ions hit the very bottom
of the hole with high energy. Therefore, we can conclude that this is a physical phenomenon
which strongly depends on the mask geometry. Apart from the yO2 = 0.62, which exhibited
a different behavior due to a significantly reduced vertical etching, reducing the tapering
angle below 1° resulted in more ions being reflected towards the bottom, while increasing it
resulted in a bowing closer to the mask layer and away from the middle of the hole depth.

(a)

(b)

Figure 8. (a) Depth and (b) width at half-depth (WAHD) of a cylindrical hole as the mask tapering
angle was varied from 0° to 4°. The depth is maximized when the WAHD reaches its minimum for all
the gas compositions. For lower-oxygen-content settings, where the passivation does not attenuate
the changes in tapering, the depth peaks after an initial angle increase and decreases significantly as
the angle increases further, while the WAHD reaches a minimum after an initial angle increase and
increases significantly with a further angle increase. Since the most significant changes were expected
for small taper angles, we used more sample points in the range from 0° to 1°.

4.2. Impact of Mask Faceting
In the previous section, we studied the impact of mask tapering, or the effect of having
a layer on top of the etched layer which had a tapered sidewall profile. However, even
if the mask initially has no tapering at the start of the plasma etching step, some faceting
at the corners can take place due to ion bombardment [38,43]. Since the sputtering yield
is a function of the ion incident angle, the sharp corners may erode, causing the mask to
effectively have some tapering along its sidewalls [44]. This effect can be reduced by having
thick masks, but this is not always feasible, especially since the mask thickness also has an
effect on the resulting profile of the etched feature.
We considered thin masks, where ion sputtering fully eroded the top corner, leading
to a tapering along the entire thin mask sidewall, as shown in Figure 5a. Due to the high
selectivity of silicon etching versus mask etching, which is well above 100 [45,46], masks
thinner than 0.1 µm may be employed in a SF6 /O2 plasma; nevertheless, we used 0.1 µm

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

11 of 16

as the minimum examined thickness, which still caused a significant sidewall etching,
and the thinner masks’ impacts did not differ significantly in their anisotropic nature. In
Figure 9, we observe the effective changes induced in the etched profile due to faceting of a
thin mask in a plasma with an oxygen fraction yO2 = 0.5 in the feed gas by capturing the
maximum depth and overall profile width, as well as the normalized location along the
profile where the maximum width occurred. The value of 0 in the depth axis of Figure 9c
represents the bottom of the mask and −1 is the bottom of the final geometry. The tapering
angle was varied from 0° to 30° to capture the impact of the mask’s top-corner sputtering at
its extremes. Higher faceting angles resulted in a fully directional vertical etching as no ion
were reflected from the mask towards the substrate sidewall, resulting in the same profile
as without faceting. In Figure 9, we observe that the maximum depth increased when
increasing the facet taper angle. The increase was not completely linear as it depended on
the location where the first and second ion reflections off the sidewall landed.
Subsequently, the bowing effect, shown in Figure 9b, reached its maximum value
between 15° and 20° while being less pronounced for the thinnest considered mask of
0.1 µm, since there was a smaller mask sidewall area from which the ions could be reflected.
Furthermore, we noted the location down the feature sidewall where the maximum width
occurred in Figure 9c. At very small angles, which corresponded to weak faceting, the
maximum width occurred just under the mask as the reflected ions impinged directly at
the bottom of the geometry, leaving the top of the substrate most exposed to lateral etching.
A further increase in tapering shifted the impact point of the reflected ions from the feature
bottom towards the sidewall, resulting in a steep decrease in the vertical location of the
maximum width. Analogous to the previous section, very high angles shifted the bowing
effect further up the profile sidewall. This showed that the sputtering of the mask corners
could lead to significant changes in the final profile. By using significantly thicker masks, a
smaller fraction of the mask would be faceted and the impact would be less pronounced.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 9. Depth, maximum width, and its location down the feature sidewall for thin mask faceting.
In (a), the maximum depth increases with increasing the tapering angle. In (b), bowing is at its
maximum for angles between 15° and 20° while being less pronounced for the thinnest considered
mask of 0.1 µm due to a reduced ion reflection surface. The location of the maximum width (c) jumps
from just under the mask towards the bottom of the profile and approaches the mask again for
higher angles.

4.3. Impact of Mask Etch Rate
In Section 4.1, the applied mask sputtering yield used was calibrated to the experiments
with the SiO2 mask. Since different mask materials have different sputtering yields, using
the same setup from Section 3 with oxygen fraction yO2 = 0.5 in the feed gas, we varied the

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

12 of 16

total mask sputtering yield from 0.01 to 0.5, corresponding to negligible mask etching and
etching away the entire mask layer, respectively. In Figure 10a, we observe that the longest
depth was achieved in the scenario where the entire mask was etched away (sputtering
yield of 0.5), while resulting in the lowest lateral etching, as shown in Figure 10b. This was
in line with the findings from the previous sections, as thinner masks caused less species
reflections towards the sidewall.

(a)

(b)

Figure 10. Impact of the mask etch rate on the depth and WAHD of the etched profile. (a) The highest
vertical etch rate is achieved when the entire mask is etched away. (b) Consequently, this scenario
results in the lowest lateral etch rate.

4.4. Rectangular Trench Profiles
The results presented in the previous sections focused on cylindrical hole geometries.
We now turn our attention to the trench masks, with a trench width of 0.4 µm using the
parameters from Table 1.
From the results in Figure 11a, we can observe that the trenches had significantly
higher vertical etch rates than their comparable hole geometries, while at the same time
having higher lateral etch rates in the vast majority of the samples. Higher etch rates in both
metrics could be explained by a higher flux of all species reaching the substrate surfaces
in trenches.
The reason for the increased flux in the trench geometry is due to less reflections taking
place off the sidewalls in a trench geometry. When a particle enters a trench, its movement
is only restricted in one dimension, while a cylindrical geometry interrupts a particle’s
motion in all directions. This means that a particle which finally causes the removal of a
substrate will have undergone significantly more reflections off of the sidewall, meaning
that its effective weight will be reduced. In the case where the oxygen fraction is very high
(0.62), the effect is less significant or even reversed. This is because the increased oxygen
inhibits chemical reactions and almost all of the etching is then caused by ion bombardment.
As ions hit the surface of the sidewall, they are directed towards the bottom, resulting in a
deeper profile in the cylindrical geometry due to more surfaces being present, off of which
the ions can reflect specularly and be directed towards the trench bottom.
Regarding the impact of the mask taper angle, we note that the general trend is the
same for both cylindrical and trench geometries. Increasing the taper angle beyond 1°
results in a shallower geometryx, when using either a cylindrical or rectangular trench
mask. Therefore, the results presented earlier for a cylindrical hole are also valid for a
trench structure.

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

13 of 16

(a)

(b)

Figure 11. (a) Depth and (b) width at half-depth (WAHD) for trenches denoted with a solid line with
squares, and holes shown with a dashed line with circles. Trench geometries exhibit higher vertical
and lateral etching.

5. Conclusions
A thorough simulation study of the impact of the mask geometry on the plasma etched
profiles for cylindrical holes and rectangular trenches was performed. This required the
implementation of a physics-based 3D feature-scale model for SF6 /O2 plasma etching in an
in-house level set-based process simulator, ViennaPS, and its calibration using experimental
data from literature. The model was subsequently applied to study the impact of mask
tapering, mask thickness, and faceting on the final feature profiles.
It is well established that the increase of O2 in the feed gas makes the etching process
more anisotropic. We found that slight variations in the taper angle, up to 1° for both
cylindrical holes and rectangular trenches, either increased the directionality of the etching
process or did not impact the final profile significantly. Moreover, having a taper angle
of 0.5° was even desirable as it led to more directional etching and deeper etched profiles.
Therefore, for the masks with about 1.2 µm in thickness, mask design rules can be relaxed
as long as the angle does not exceed 2°, at which point significant lateral etching can lead
to undesirable bowing in the final structure. The effect of the variations in the taper angle
can be mitigated by introducing more passivating species into the feed gas; however, this
will lead to a significant increase in the etch time since the passivating species serves to
inhibit etching everywhere in the trench.
In the mask faceting study, we used the same approach to examine the fabrication
parameters with different mask materials, which caused changes in the ion sputtering of
the mask, leading to faceting. The impact of the very high tapering angles on thin masks
with thicknesses in the range 0.1 µm to 0.3 µm were simulated. We found that allowing a
variation in the design of the mask sidewall tapering, up to 10°, did not significantly impact
the etching profile, meaning that the mask design rules could be relaxed there. However,
one must ensure that sidewall tapering does not exceed 10°, as this will cause significant
bowing in the final structure. Additionally, it is beneficial to use as thin masks as possible,
0.1 µm and below, as they naturally have less of an impact on the final structure. The impact
of the ion sputtering can be attenuated by using very thick masks as the erosion of the

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

14 of 16

top corners will not have such a pronounced effect. However, this is not feasible for all
materials and devices.
Finally, to have a closer look at the impact of the mask etch rate, we compared several
scenarios between negligible mask etching and complete mask removal by the end of the
process. Analogous to the finding that thin masks had less of an impact, we found that
masks which were easily etched away produced less lateral etching. Hence, mask erosion
does not necessarily lead to undesired effects, but it is essential to ensure it does not get
completely removed during the etching process, as this would lead to substrate etching in
undesired places.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.B. and L.F.; methodology, J.B., J.P. and L.F.; software, J.B.,
J.P., T.R., X.K., O.B., Z.S., G.S., M.K. and L.F.; validation, J.B. and L.F.; formal analysis, J.B. and L.F.;
investigation, J.B.; resources, L.F.; data curation, J.B.; writing—original draft preparation, J.B. and
L.F.; writing—review and editing, J.P., T.R., X.K., O.B., Z.S., G.S., M.K. and L.F.; visualization, J.B.;
supervision, L.F.; project administration, L.F.; funding acquisition, L.F. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded in part by the Austrian Federal Ministry for Digital and Economic
Affairs, the National Foundation for Research, Technology and Development and the Christian
Doppler Research Association and by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency FFG (Bridge Young
Scientists) under Project 878662 “Process-Aware Structure Emulation for Device-Technology CoOptimization”. The publication of this manuscript was funded by the TU Wien Bibliothek through
its Open Access Funding Program.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study is available upon request from the
corresponding author. The simulation tool used in the study, ViennaPS, is available via open source
license: https://github.com/ViennaTools/ViennaPS (accessed on 2 January 2023).
Acknowledgments: The financial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Labour and Economy,
the National Foundation for Research, Technology and Development and the Christian Doppler
Research Association is gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported in part by the Austrian
Research Promotion Agency FFG (Bridge Young Scientists) under Project 878662 “Process-Aware
Structure Emulation for Device-Technology Co-Optimization”. The authors acknowledge TU Wien
Bibliothek for financial support through its Open Access Funding Program.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
3D
AM
DRIE
DTCO
ER
FET
HAR
RF
RIE
SDF
SEM
TSV
WAHD

three-dimensional
additive manufacturing
deep reactive ion etching
design-technology co-optimization
etch rate
field-effect transistor
high aspect ratio
radio frequency
reactive ion etching
signed distance function
scanning electron microscopy
through-silicon via
width at half-depth

References
1.
2.

Razavieh, A.; Zeitzoff, P.; Nowak, E.J. Challenges and limitations of CMOS scaling for FinFET and beyond architectures. IEEE
Trans. Nanotechnol. 2019, 18, 999–1004. [CrossRef]
Chen, M.L.; Sun, X.; Liu, H.; Wang, H.; Zhu, Q.; Wang, S.; Du, H.; Dong, B.; Zhang, J.; Sun, Y.; et al. A FinFET with one atomic
layer channel. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1205. [CrossRef]

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

15 of 16

Anderson, B.; Jagannathan, H. VTFET: The Revolutionary New Chip Architecture that Could Keep Moore’s Law Alive for Years
to Come. Ibm Res. 2022 . Available online: https://research.ibm.com/blog/vtfet-semiconductor-architecture (accessed on
20 November 2022).
Arden, W.; Brillouët, M.; Cogez, P.; Graef, M.; Huizing, B.; Mahnkopf, R. “More-than-Moore” White Paper. Int. Technol. Roadmap
Semicond. (ITRS) 2010, 2, 14. Available online: http://itrs2.net/uploads/4/9/7/7/49775221/irc-itrs-mtm-v2_3.pdf (accessed on
20 November 2022).
Motoyoshi, M. Through-silicon via (TSV). Proc. IEEE 2009, 97, 43–48. [CrossRef]
Gambino, J.P.; Adderly, S.A.; Knickerbocker, J.U. An overview of through-silicon-via technology and manufacturing challenges.
Microelectron. Eng. 2015, 135, 73–106. [CrossRef]
Guo, H.; Cao, S.; Li, L.; Zhang, X. A review on the mainstream through-silicon via etching methods. Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process.
2022, 137, 106182. [CrossRef]
Bassett, D.; Printz, W.; Furukawa, T. Etching of silicon nitride in 3D NAND structures. Ecs Trans. 2015, 69, 159–167. [CrossRef]
Reiter, T.; Klemenschits, X.; Filipovic, L. Impact of plasma induced damage on the fabrication of 3D NAND flash memory.
Solid-State Electron. 2022, 192, 108261. [CrossRef]
Goktas, N.I.; Wilson, P.; Ghukasyan, A.; Wagner, D.; McNamee, S.; LaPierre, R.R. Nanowires for energy: A review. Appl. Phys.
Rev. 2018, 5, 041305. [CrossRef]
Nugroho, A.P.; Hawari, N.H.; Prakoso, B.; Refino, A.D.; Yulianto, N.; Iskandar, F.; Kartini, E.; Peiner, E.; Wasisto, H.S.; Sumboja, A.
Vertically Aligned n-Type Silicon Nanowire Array as a Free-Standing Anode for Lithium-Ion Batteries. Nanomaterials 2021, 11,
3137. [CrossRef]
Mokkapati, S.; Jagadish, C. Nanowires for Energy Applications; Semiconductors and Semimetals; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA,
USA, 2018; Volume 98. [CrossRef]
Feynman, R.P. There’s plenty of room at the bottom. Eng. Sci. 2059, 23, 22–36. Available online: https://resolver.caltech.edu/
CaltechES:23.5.0 (accessed on 15 March 2023 ).
Frenkel, D. Plenty of room at the top. Nat. Mater. 2006, 5, 85–86. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Leiserson, C.E.; Thompson, N.C.; Emer, J.S.; Kuszmaul, B.C.; Lampson, B.W.; Sanchez, D.; Schardl, T.B. There’s plenty of room at
the Top: What will drive computer performance after Moore’s law? Science 2020, 368, eaam9744. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Love, L.; Post, B.; Noakes, M.; Nycz, A.; Kunc, V. There’s plenty of room at the top. Addit. Manuf. 2021, 39, 101727. [CrossRef]
Rodrigues, F.; Aguinsky, L.F.; Toifl, A.; Scharinger, A.; Hossinger, A.; Weinbub, J. Surface reaction and topography modeling of
fluorocarbon plasma etching. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Simulation of Semiconductor Processes and
Devices (SISPAD), IEEE, Dallas, TX, USA, 27–29 September 2021 ; pp. 229–232. [CrossRef]
Mitchell, W.J.; Thibeault, B.J.; John, D.D.; Reynolds, T.E. Highly selective and vertical etch of silicon dioxide using ruthenium
films as an etch mask. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. Vac. Surfaces Film. 2021, 39, 043204. [CrossRef]
Solanki, A.; Um, H.D. Top-Down Etching of Si Nanowires. In Semiconductors and Semimetals; Nanowires for Energy Applications;
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2018; Chapter 2; Volume 98, pp. 71–149. [CrossRef]
Filipovic, L.; Selberherr, S.; Singulani, A.P.; Roger, F.; Carniello, S. Impact of across-wafer variation on the electrical performance of
TSVs. In Proceedings of the International Interconnect Technology Conference/Advanced Metallization Conference (IITC/AMC),
IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, 23–26 May 2016 ; pp. 130–132. [CrossRef]
Mangindaan, D.; Kuo, C.C.; Lin, S.Y.; Wang, M.J. The Diffusion-reaction Model on the Wettability Gradient Created by SF6
Plasma. Plasma Process. Polym. 2012, 9, 808–819. [CrossRef]
Klemenschits, X.; Reiter, T.; Bobinac, J.; Piso, J.; Filipovic, L. ViennaPS 1.0.0. 2022. Available online: https://github.com/ViennaTools/
ViennaPS (accessed on 20 November 2022).
Klemenschits, X.; Reiter, T.; Bobinac, J.; Piso, J.; Filipovic, L. ViennaLS 2.1.0. 2022. Available online: https://github.com/ViennaTools/
ViennaLS (accessed on 20 November 2022).
Reiter, T.; Klemenschits, X.; Bobinac, J.; Piso, J.; Filipovic, L. ViennaRay 1.2.0. 2022. Available online: https://github.com/ViennaTools/
ViennaRay (accessed on 20 November 2022).
Belen, R.J.; Gomez, S.; Cooperberg, D.; Kiehlbauch, M.; Aydil, E.S. Feature-scale model of Si etching in SF6 /O2 plasma and
comparison with experiments. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. Vac. Surfaces Film. 2005, 23, 1430–1439. [CrossRef]
Singh, V. Feature Scale Modeling. In Handbook of Thin Film Deposition Processes and Techniques, 2nd ed.; William Andrew Publishing:
Norwich, NY, USA, 2001; Chapter 5, pp. 205–240. [CrossRef]
Ertl, O. Numerical Methods for Topography Simulation. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), Vienna, Austria,
2010. [CrossRef]
Ertl, O.; Selberherr, S. A fast level set framework for large three-dimensional topography simulations. Comput. Phys. Commun.
2009, 180, 1242–1250. [CrossRef]
Klemenschits, X.; Selberherr, S.; Filipovic, L. Modeling of gate stack patterning for advanced technology nodes: A review.
Micromachines 2018, 9, 631. [CrossRef]
Klemenschits, X. Emulation and Simulation of Microelectronic Fabrication Processes. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität Wien
(TU Wien), Vienna, Austria, 2022. [CrossRef]
Bloomenthal, J.; Bajaj, C.; Blinn, J.; Cani, M.P.; Wyvill, B.; Rockwood, A.; Wyvill, G. Introduction to Implicit Surfaces; Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.: San Francisco, CA, USA, 1997.

Micromachines 2023, 14, 665

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.
41.

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

16 of 16

Sethian, J.A. Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1999; Volume 3.
Osher, S.; Sethian, J.A. Fronts propagating with curvature-dependent speed: Algorithms based on Hamilton-Jacobi formulations.
J. Comput. Phys. 1988, 79, 12–49. [CrossRef]
Osher, S.; Shu, C.W. High-order esentially nonoscillatory schemes for Hamilton-Jacobi equations. Siam J. Numer. Anal. 1991,
28, 907–922. [CrossRef]
d’Agostino, R.; Flamm, D.L. Plasma etching of Si and SiO2 in SF6 /O2 mixtures. J. Appl. Phys. 1981, 52, 162–167. [CrossRef]
Wu, B.; Kumar, A.; Pamarthy, S. High aspect ratio silicon etch: A review. J. Appl. Phys. 2010, 108, 051101. [CrossRef]
Gray, D.C. Phenomenological modeling of ion-enhanced surface kinetics in fluorine-based plasma etching. J. Vac. Sci. Technol.
Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. 1993, 11, 1243. [CrossRef]
Donnelly, V.M.; Kornblit, A. Plasma etching: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. Vac. Surfaces Film. 2013,
31, 050825. [CrossRef]
Bobinac, J.; Reiter, T.; Piso, J.; Klemenschits, X.; Baumgartner, O.; Stanojevic, Z.; Stroff, G.; Karner, M.; Filipovic, L. Impact of mask
tapering on SF6 /O2 plasma etching. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Microelectronic Devices and Technologies
(MicDAT), Corfu, Greece, 21–23 September 2022; Yurish, S.Y., Ed.; IFSA Publishing, Barcelona, Spain, 2022, pp. 91–94.
Fukumoto, H.; Eriguchi, K.; Ono, K. Effects of mask pattern geometry on plasma etching profiles. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2009,
48, 096001. [CrossRef]
Ichikawa, T.; Ichinose, D.; Kawabata, K.; Tamaoki, N. Topography simulation of BiCS memory hole etching modeled by
elementary experiments of SiO2 and Si etching. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Simulation of Semiconductor
Processes and Devices (SISPAD), IEEE, Bologna, Italy, 6–8 September 2010; pp. 45–48. [CrossRef]
Filipovic, L. Topography Simulation of Novel Processing Techniques. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien),
Vienna, Austria, 2012. Available online: http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.12708/13712 (accessed on 21 November 2022).
Bay, H.L.; Bohdansky, J. Sputtering yields for light ions as a function of angle of incidence. Appl. Phys. 1979, 19, 421–426.
[CrossRef]
Kornblit, A.; Grieco, M.J.; Peters, D.W.; Saunders, T.E. Linewidth control in trilevel etching. In Integrated Circuit Metrology,
Inspection, & Process Control ; Monahan, K.M., Ed.; SPIE: Bellingham, WA, USA, 1987; pp. 320–326. [CrossRef]
Merzsch, S.; Steib, F.; Wasisto, H.; Stranz, A.; Hinze, P.; Weimann, T.; Peiner, E.; Waag, A. Production of vertical nanowire
resonators by cryogenic-ICP–DRIE. Microsyst. Technol. 2014, 20, 759–767. [CrossRef]
Herth, E.; Edmond, S.; Bouville, D.; Cercus, J.L.; Bayle, F.; Cambril, E. Micro-/Nanopillars for Micro-and Nanotechnologies Using
Inductively Coupled Plasmas. Phys. Status Solidi 2019, 216, 1900324. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

