 Mechanism of Resist Pattern Collapse during Development Process - IOPscience 
 Skip to content IOP Science home Accessibility Help Search Search all IOPscience content Search Article Lookup Journals Journals list Browse more than 100 science journal titles Subject collections Read the very best research published in IOP journals Publishing partners Partner organisations and publications Open access IOP Publishing open access policy guide IOP Conference Series Read open access proceedings from science conferences worldwide Books Publishing Support Login IOPscience login / Sign Up Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 
 The Japan Society of Applied Physics (JSAP) serves as an academic interface between science and engineering and an interactive platform for academia and the industry. JSAP is a "conduit" for the transfer of fundamental concepts to the industry for development and technological applications. JSAP was established as an official academic society in 1946, and since then, it has been one of the leading academic societies in Japan. The society's interests cover a broad variety of scientific and technological fields, and JSAP continues to explore state-of-the-art and interdisciplinary topics. To this end, the JSAP holds annual conferences; publishes scientific journals; actively sponsors events, symposia, and festivals related to science education; and compiles information related to state-of-the-art technology for the public. 
 Mechanism of Resist Pattern Collapse during Development Process Toshihiko Tanaka , Mitsuaki Morigami Mitsuaki Morigami and Nobufumi Atoda Nobufumi Atoda 
 Copyright (c) 1993 The Japan Society of Applied Physics
 Japanese Journal of Applied Physics ,
 Volume 32 ,
 Number 12S Citation Toshihiko Tanaka et al 1993 Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32 6059 DOI 10.1143/JJAP.32.6059 Authors 
 Toshihiko Tanaka AFFILIATIONS SORTEC Corporation, 16-1 Wadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-42 Mitsuaki Morigami Mitsuaki Morigami AFFILIATIONS SORTEC Corporation, 16-1 Wadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-42 Nobufumi Atoda Nobufumi Atoda AFFILIATIONS SORTEC Corporation, 16-1 Wadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-42 
 Figures Skip to each figure in the article Tables Skip to each table in the article References Citations Article data 
 Skip to each data item in the article
 What
 is article data? Open science Authors 
 Toshihiko Tanaka AFFILIATIONS SORTEC Corporation, 16-1 Wadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-42 Mitsuaki Morigami Mitsuaki Morigami AFFILIATIONS SORTEC Corporation, 16-1 Wadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-42 Nobufumi Atoda Nobufumi Atoda AFFILIATIONS SORTEC Corporation, 16-1 Wadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-42 
 Article metrics 2623 Total downloads 0 Video abstract views Permissions Get permission to re-use this article Share this article Article information Dates Received 7 July 1993 Accepted 18 September 1993 Buy this article in print Journal RSS 
 Sign up for new issue notifications
 1347-4065/32/12S/6059 Abstract 
 In this study, the mechanism of resist pattern collapse during the resist development process is investigated. Resist pattern collapse occurs while the rinse liquid is being dried off. This conclusion was reached after observing the resist pattern before and after the rinse-liquid drying process. The resist pattern in the rinse liquid was observed using an atomic force microscope. The source of resist pattern collapse is the surface tension of the rinse liquid. The force increases with decreasing space width between resist patterns. To avoid the resist pattern collapse problem, the use of a low-surface-tension rinse liquid, a rinse liquid with contact angle ∼90° at the resist surface, or a rigid and highly adhesive resist material is effective. 
 Export citation and abstract BibTeX RIS Previous article in issue Next article in issue Access this article The computer you are using is not registered by an institution with a subscription to this article. Please choose
 one of the options below. Login IOPscience login JSAP member access Purchase from Article Galaxy CCC RightFind Purchase this article from our trusted document delivery partners. Rent from Make a recommendation To gain access to this content, please complete the Recommendation
 Form and we will follow up with your librarian or Institution on your behalf. For corporate researchers we can also follow up directly with your R&D manager, or the information
 management contact at your company. Institutional subscribers have access to the current volume, plus a
 10-year back file (where available). Back to top 10.1143/JJAP.32.6059 You may also like Journal articles Mechanism of Resist Pattern Collapse Freeze-Drying Process to Avoid Resist Pattern Collapse Prevention of Resist Pattern Collapse by Resist Heating during Rinsing Effect of Low-Surface-Tension Liquid on Pattern Collapse Analyzed by Observing Dynamical Meniscus Prevention of Resist Pattern Collapse by Flood Exposure during Rinse Process Scientific Director Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia Director, System Software IonQ ISOLDE System Engineer (SY-STI-TSP-2026-131-GRAP) CERN More jobs Post a job IOPscience Journals Books IOP Conference Series About IOPscience Contact Us Developing countries access IOP Publishing open access policy Accessibility IOP Publishing Copyright 2024 IOP Publishing Terms and Conditions Disclaimer Privacy and Cookie Policy Text and Data mining policy Publishing Support Authors Reviewers Conference Organisers About IOP Publishing 
 IOP Publishing, the publishing arm of the Institute of Physics, is a purpose-led, not-for-profit, society-owned scientific publisher. We publish high-quality, trusted, peer-reviewed research in over 100 scientific journals on our IOPscience platform, providing visibility, recognition, and impact for work across the physical sciences.
 IOP Publishing Facebook page IOP Publishing LinkedIn page IOP Publishing Youtube page IOP Publishing WeChat QR code IOP Publishing Weibo page IOP Publishing Bluesky page IOP Publishing Threads page 